Single Variable Calculus | Mathematics | MIT OpenCourseWare Browse Course Material Syllabus 1. Differentiation Part A: Definition and Basic Rules Part B: Implicit Differentiation and Inverse Functions Exam 1 2. Applications of Differentiation Part A: Approximation and Curve Sketching Part B: Optimization, Related Rates and Newton&#39;s Method Part C: Mean Value Theorem, Antiderivatives and Differential Equa Exam 2 3. The Definite Integral and its Applications Part A: Definition of the Definite Integral and First Fundamental Part B: Second Fundamental Theorem, Areas, Volumes Part C: Average Value, Probability and Numerical Integration Exam 3 4. Techniques of Integration Part A: Trigonometric Powers, Trigonometric Substitution and Com Part B: Partial Fractions, Integration by Parts, Arc Length, and Part C: Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates Exam 4 5. Exploring the Infinite Part A: L&#39;Hospital&#39;s Rule and Improper Integrals Part B: Taylor Series Final Exam Course Info Instructor Prof. David Jerison Departments Mathematics As Taught In Fall 2010 Level Undergraduate Topics Mathematics Calculus Differential Equations Learning Resource Types grading Exam Solutions grading Exams notes Lecture Notes theaters Lecture Videos assignment_turned_in Problem Set Solutions assignment Problem Sets theaters Problem-solving Videos Download Course menu search Give Now About OCW Help &amp; Faqs Contact Us search GIVE NOW about ocw help &amp; faqs contact us 18.01SC | Fall 2010 | Undergraduate Single Variable Calculus Menu Syllabus 1. Differentiation Part A: Definition and Basic Rules Part B: Implicit Differentiation and Inverse Functions Exam 1 2. Applications of Differentiation Part A: Approximation and Curve Sketching Part B: Optimization, Related Rates and Newton&#39;s Method Part C: Mean Value Theorem, Antiderivatives and Differential Equa Exam 2 3. The Definite Integral and its Applications Part A: Definition of the Definite Integral and First Fundamental Part B: Second Fundamental Theorem, Areas, Volumes Part C: Average Value, Probability and Numerical Integration Exam 3 4. Techniques of Integration Part A: Trigonometric Powers, Trigonometric Substitution and Com Part B: Partial Fractions, Integration by Parts, Arc Length, and Part C: Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates Exam 4 5. Exploring the Infinite Part A: L&#39;Hospital&#39;s Rule and Improper Integrals Part B: Taylor Series Final Exam Course Description This calculus course covers differentiation and integration of functions of one variable, and concludes with a brief discussion of infinite series. Calculus is fundamental to many scientific disciplines including physics, engineering, and economics. Course Format This course has been designed for independent study. It … Show more This calculus course covers differentiation and integration of functions of one variable, and concludes with a brief discussion of infinite series. Calculus is fundamental to many scientific disciplines including physics, engineering, and economics. Course Format This course has been designed for independent study. It includes all of the materials you will need to understand the concepts covered in this subject. The materials in this course include: Lecture Videos with supporting written notes Recitation Videos of problem-solving tips Worked Examples with detailed solutions to sample problems Problem sets with solutions Exams with solutions Interactive Java Applets (&ldquo;Mathlets&rdquo;) to reinforce key concepts Content Development David Jerison Arthur Mattuck Haynes Miller Benjamin Brubaker Jeremy Orloff Heidi Burgiel Christine Breiner David Jordan Joel Lewis About OCW Scholar OCW Scholar courses are designed specifically for OCW&rsquo;s single largest audience: independent learners. These courses are substantially more complete than typical OCW courses, and include new custom-created content as well as materials repurposed from previously published courses. Show less Course Info Instructor Prof. David Jerison Departments Mathematics Topics Mathematics Calculus Differential Equations Learning Resource Types grading Exam Solutions grading Exams notes Lecture Notes theaters Lecture Videos assignment_turned_in Problem Set Solutions assignment Problem Sets theaters Problem-solving Videos Secant approximation mathlet from the d&rsquo;Arbeloff Interactive Math Project. Image courtesy of Haynes Miller, Heidi Burgiel, and J.-M. Claus. Download Course Over 2,500 courses & materials Freely sharing knowledge with learners and educators around the world. Learn more © 2001–2026 Massachusetts Institute of Technology Accessibility Creative Commons License Terms and Conditions Proud member of: © 2001–2026 Massachusetts Institute of Technology You are leaving MIT OpenCourseWare close Please be advised that external sites may have terms and conditions, including license rights, that differ from ours. MIT OCW is not responsible for any content on third party sites, nor does a link suggest an endorsement of those sites and/or their content. Stay Here Continue