Syllabus | Multivariable Calculus | Mathematics | MIT OpenCourseWare Browse Course Material Syllabus Calendar Readings Lecture Notes Assignments Exams Video Lectures Course Info Instructor Prof. Denis Auroux Departments Mathematics As Taught In Fall 2007 Level Undergraduate Topics Mathematics Calculus Differential Equations Linear Algebra Learning Resource Types grading Exam Solutions grading Exams notes Lecture Notes theaters Lecture Videos assignment Problem Sets Download Course menu search Give Now About OCW Help &amp; Faqs Contact Us search GIVE NOW about ocw help &amp; faqs contact us 18.02 | Fall 2007 | Undergraduate Multivariable Calculus Menu More Info Syllabus Calendar Readings Lecture Notes Assignments Exams Video Lectures Syllabus Course Meeting Times Lectures: 3 sessions / week, 1 hour / session Recitations: 2 sessions / week, 1 hour / session Prerequisite Single Variable Calculus (18.01) Main Textbook Edwards, Henry C., and David E. Penney. Multivariable Calculus . 6th ed. Lebanon, IN: Prentice Hall, 2002. ISBN: 9780130339676. Homework There are twelve problem sets. Collaboration on problem sets is encouraged, but Attempt each part of each problem yourself. Read each portion of the problem before asking for help. If you don&rsquo;t understand what is being asked, ask for help interpreting the problem and then make an honest attempt to solve it. Write up each problem independently. On both Part A and B exercises you are expected to write the answer in your own words. Write on your problem set whom you consulted and the sources you used. If you fail to do so, you may be charged with plagiarism and subject to serious penalties. It is illegal to consult materials from previous semesters. Exams There are four in-class 50-minute exams, and one final exam. If a student misses or fails an exam, he or she may take a make-up exam at certain arranged times. Make-ups for failed exams can boost the student&rsquo;s grade only up to the lowest passing score. Grading Grading is based an a 900 point scale, where the homework is worth 250 points, the four exams are worth a total of 400 points, and the final exam is worth 250 points. ACTIVITIES PERCENTAGES POINTS Problem sets 28% 250 Four Exams 44% 400 Final exam 28% 250 Course Info Instructor Prof. Denis Auroux Departments Mathematics As Taught In Fall 2007 Level Undergraduate Topics Mathematics Calculus Differential Equations Linear Algebra Learning Resource Types grading Exam Solutions grading Exams notes Lecture Notes theaters Lecture Videos assignment Problem Sets Download Course Over 2,500 courses & materials Freely sharing knowledge with learners and educators around the world. Learn more © 2001–2026 Massachusetts Institute of Technology Accessibility Creative Commons License Terms and Conditions Proud member of: © 2001–2026 Massachusetts Institute of Technology You are leaving MIT OpenCourseWare close Please be advised that external sites may have terms and conditions, including license rights, that differ from ours. MIT OCW is not responsible for any content on third party sites, nor does a link suggest an endorsement of those sites and/or their content. Stay Here Continue