--> Mental Representation (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy/Winter 2018 Edition) Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Archive Winter 2018 Edition Menu Browse Table of Contents New in this Archive Chronological Archives About Editorial Information About the SEP Editorial Board How to Cite the SEP Special Characters Contact Support SEP Support the SEP PDFs for SEP Friends Make a Donation SEPIA for Libraries Entry Navigation Entry Contents Bibliography Academic Tools Friends PDF Preview Author and Citation Info Back to Top Mental Representation First published Thu Mar 30, 2000; substantive revision Tue Dec 11, 2012 The notion of a &ldquo;mental representation&rdquo; is, arguably, in the first instance a theoretical construct of cognitive science. As such, it is a basic concept of the Computational Theory of Mind, according to which cognitive states and processes are constituted by the occurrence, transformation and storage (in the mind/brain) of information-bearing structures (representations) of one kind or another. However, on the assumption that a representation is an object with semantic properties (content, reference, truth-conditions, truth-value, etc.), a mental representation may be more broadly construed as a mental object with semantic properties. As such, mental representations (and the states and processes that involve them) need not be understood only in computational terms. On this broader construal, mental representation is a philosophical topic with roots in antiquity and a rich history and literature predating the recent &ldquo;cognitive revolution,&rdquo; and which continues to be of interest in pure philosophy. Though most contemporary philosophers of mind acknowledge the relevance and importance of cognitive science, they vary in their degree of engagement with its literature, methods and results; and there remain, for many, issues concerning the representational properties of the mind that can be addressed independently of the computational hypothesis. Though the term &lsquo;Representational Theory of Mind&rsquo; is sometimes used almost interchangeably with &lsquo;Computational Theory of Mind&rsquo;, I will use it here to refer to any theory that postulates the existence of semantically evaluable mental objects, including philosophy's stock in trade mentalia &mdash; thoughts, concepts, percepts, ideas, impressions, notions, rules, schemas, images, phantasms, etc. &mdash; as well as the various sorts of &ldquo;subpersonal&rdquo; representations postulated by cognitive science. Representational theories may thus be contrasted with theories, such as those of Baker (1995), Collins (1987), Dennett (1987), Gibson (1966, 1979), Reid (1764/1997), Stich (1983) and Thau (2002), which deny the existence of such things. 1. The Representational Theory of Mind 2. Propositional Attitudes 3. Conceptual and Nonconceptual Representation 4. Representationalism and Phenomenalism 5. Imagery 6. Content Determination 7. Internalism and Externalism 8. The Computational Theory of Mind 9. Thought and Language Bibliography Academic Tools Other Internet Resources Related Entries 1. The Representational Theory of Mind The Representational Theory of Mind (RTM) (which goes back at least to Aristotle) takes as its starting point commonsense mental states, such as thoughts, beliefs, desires, perceptions and imagings. Such states are said to have &ldquo;intentionality&rdquo; &mdash; they are about or refer to things, and may be evaluated with respect to properties like consistency, truth, appropriateness and accuracy. (For example, the thought that cousins are not related is inconsistent, the belief that Elvis is dead is true, the desire to eat the moon is inappropriate, a visual experience of a ripe strawberry as red is accurate, an imaging of George W. Bush with dreadlocks is inaccurate.) RTM defines such intentional mental states as relations to mental representations, and explains the intentionality of the former in terms of the semantic properties of the latter. For example, to believe that Elvis is dead is to be appropriately related to a mental representation whose propositional content is that Elvis is dead . (The desire that Elvis be dead, the fear that he is dead, the regret that he is dead, etc., involve different relations to the same mental representation.) To perceive a strawberry is, on the representational view, to have a sensory experience of some kind which is appropriately related to (e.g., caused by) the strawberry. RTM also understands mental processes such as thinking, reasoning and imagining as sequences of intentional mental states. For example, to imagine the moon rising over a mountain is, inter alia , to entertain a series of mental images of the moon (and a mountain). To infer a proposition q from the propositions p and if p then q is ( inter alia ) to have a sequence of thoughts of the form p , if p then q , q . Contemporary philosophers of mind have typically supposed (or at least hoped ) that the mind can be naturalized &mdash; i.e., that all mental facts have explanations in the terms of natural science. This assumption is shared within cognitive science, which attempts to provide accounts of mental states and processes in terms (ultimately) of features of the brain and central nervous system. In the course of doing so, the various sub-disciplines of cognitive science (including cognitive and computational psychology and cognitive and computational neuroscience) postulate a number of different kinds of structures and processes, many of which are not directly implicated by mental states and processes as commonsensically conceived. There remains, however, a shared commitment to the idea that mental states and processes are to be explained in terms of mental representations. In philosophy, recent debates about mental representation have centered around the existence of propositional attitudes (beliefs, desires, etc.) and the determination of their contents (how they come to be about what they are about), and the existence of phenomenal properties and their relation to the content of thought and perceptual experience. Within cognitive science itself, the philosophically relevant debates have been focused on the computational architecture of the brain and central nervous system, and the compatibility of scientific and commonsense accounts of mentality. 2. Propositional Attitudes Intentional Realists such as Dretske (e.g., 1988) and Fodor (e.g., 1987) note that the generalizations we apply in everyday life in predicting and explaining each other's behavior (often collectively referred to as &ldquo;folk psychology&rdquo;) are both remarkably successful and indispensable. What a person believes, doubts, desires, fears, etc. is a highly reliable indicator of what that person will do; and we have no other way of making sense of each other's behavior than by ascribing such states and applying the relevant generalizations. We are thus committed to the basic truth of commonsense psychology and, hence, to the existence of the states its generalizations refer to. (Some realists, such as Fodor, also hold that commonsense psychology will be vindicated by cognitive science, given that propositional attitudes can be construed as computational relations to mental representations.) Intentional Eliminativists , such as Churchland, (perhaps) Dennett and (at one time) Stich argue that no such things as propositional attitudes (and their constituent representational states) are implicated by the successful explanation and prediction of our mental lives and behavior. Churchland denies that the generalizations of commonsense propositional-attitude psychology are true. He (1981) argues that folk psychology is a theory of the mind with a long history of failure and decline, and that it resists incorporation into the framework of modern scientific theories (including cognitive psychology). As such, it is comparable to alchemy and phlogiston theory, and ought to suffer a comparable fate. Commonsense psychology is false , and the states (and representations) it postulates simply don't exist. (It should be noted that Churchland is not an eliminativist about mental representation tout court . See, e.g., Churchland 1989.) Dennett (1987a) grants that the generalizations of commonsense psychology are true and indispensable, but denies that this is sufficient reason to believe in the entities they appear to refer to. He argues that to give an intentional explanation of a system's behavior is merely to adopt the &ldquo;intentional stance&rdquo; toward it. If the strategy of assigning contentful states to a system and predicting and explaining its behavior (on the assumption that it is rational &mdash; i.e., that it behaves as it should, given the propositional attitudes it should have, given its environment) is successful, then the system is intentional, and the propositional-attitude generalizations we apply to it are true. But there is nothing more to having a propositional attitude than this. (See Dennett 1987a: 29.) Though he has been taken to be thus claiming that intentional explanations should be construed instrumentally, Dennett (1991) insists that he is a &ldquo;moderate&rdquo; realist about propositional attitudes, since he believes that the patterns in the behavior and behavioral dispositions of a system on the basis of which we (truly) attribute intentional states to it are objectively real. In the event that there are two or more explanatorily adequate but substantially different systems of intentional ascriptions to an individual, however, Dennett claims there is no fact of the matter about what the individual believes (1987b, 1991). This does suggest an irrealism at least with respect to the sorts of things Fodor and Dretske take beliefs to be; though it is not the view that there is simply nothing in the world that makes intentional explanations true. (Davidson 1973, 1974 and Lewis 1974 also defend the view that what it is to have a propositional attitude is just to be interpretable in a particular way. It is, however, not entirely clear whether they intend their views to imply irrealism about propositional attitudes.) Stich (1983) argues that cognitive psychology does not (or, in any case, should not) taxonomize mental states by their semantic properties at all, since attribution of psychological states by content is sensitive to factors that render it problematic in the context of a scientific psychology. Cognitive psychology seeks causal explanations of behavior and cognition, and the causal powers of a mental state are determined by its intrinsic &ldquo;structural&rdquo; or &ldquo;syntactic&rdquo; properties. The semantic properties of a mental state, however, are determined by its extrinsic properties &mdash; e.g., its history, environmental or intramental relations. Hence, such properties cannot figure in causal-scientific explanations of behavior. (Fodor 1994 and Dretske 1988 are realist attempts to come to grips with some of these problems.) Stich proposes a syntactic theory of the mind, on which the semantic properties of mental states play no explanatory role. (Stich has since changed his views on a number of these issues. See Stich 1996.) 3. Conceptual and Non-Conceptual Representation It is a traditional assumption among realists about mental representations that representational states come in two basic varieties (cf. Boghossian 1995). There are those, such as thoughts, which are composed of concepts and have no phenomenal (&ldquo;what-it's-like&rdquo;) features (&ldquo;qualia&rdquo;), and those, such as sensations, which have phenomenal features but no conceptual constituents. (Nonconceptual content is usually defined as a kind of content that states of a creature lacking concepts might nonetheless enjoy. [ 1 ] ) On this taxonomy, mental states can represent either in a way analogous to expressions of natural languages or in a way analogous to drawings, paintings, maps, photographs or movies. Perceptual states such as seeing that something is blue, are sometimes thought of as hybrid states, consisting of, for example, a non-conceptual sensory experience and a belief, or some more integrated compound of conceptual and nonconceptual elements. (There is an extensive literature on the representational content of perceptual experience. See the entry on the contents of perception .) Disagreement over nonconceptual representation concerns the existence and nature of phenomenal properties and the role they play in determining the content of sensory experience. Dennett (1988), for example, denies that there are such things as qualia at all (as they are standardly construed); while Brandom (2002), McDowell (1994), Rey (1991) and Sellars (1956) deny that they are needed to explain the content of sensory experience. Among those who accept that experiences have phenomenal content, some (Dretske, Lycan, Tye) argue that it is reducible to a kind of intentional content, while others (Block, Loar, Peacocke) argue that it is irreducible. (See the discussion in the next section.) Some historical discussions of the representational properties of mind (e.g., Aristotle De Anima , Locke 1689/1975, Hume 1739/1978) seem to assume that nonconceptual representations &mdash; percepts (&ldquo;impressions&rdquo;), images (&ldquo;ideas&rdquo;) and the like &mdash; are the only kinds of mental representations, and that the mind represents the world in virtue of being in states that resemble things in it. On such a view, all representational states have their content in virtue of their phenomenal features. Powerful arguments, however, focusing on the lack of generality (Berkeley Principles of Human Knowledge ), ambiguity (Wittgenstein 1953) and non-compositionality (Fodor 1981c) of sensory and imagistic representations, as well as their unsuitability to function as logical (Frege 1918/1997, Geach 1957) or mathematical (Frege 1884/1953) concepts, and the symmetry of resemblance (Goodman 1976), convinced philosophers that no theory of mind can get by with only nonconceptual representations construed in this way. There has also been dissent from the traditional claim that conceptual representations (thoughts, beliefs) lack phenomenology. Chalmers (1996), Flanagan (1992), Goldman (1993), Horgan and Tienson (2002), Jackendoff (1987), Levine (1993, 1995, 2001), McGinn (1991a), Pitt (2004, 2009, 2011, Forthcoming), Searle (1992), Siewert (1998) and Strawson (1994), claim that purely conceptual (conscious) representational states themselves have a (perhaps proprietary) phenomenology. (This view &mdash; bread and butter, it should be said, among historical and contemporary Phenomenologists &mdash; has been gaining momentum of late among analytic philosophers of mind. See, e.g., the essays in Bayne and Montague 2011 and in Kriegel Forthcoming, Farkas 2008 and Kriegel 2011.) If this claim is correct, the question of what role phenomenology plays in the determination of content rearises for conceptual representation; and the eliminativist ambitions of Sellars, Brandom, Rey, et al. would meet a new obstacle. (It would also raise prima facie problems for reductivist representationalism (see the next section), as well as for reductive naturalistic theories of intentional content.) 4. Representationalism and Phenomenalism Among realists about phenomenal properties, the central division is between representationalists (also called &ldquo;representationists&rdquo; and &ldquo;intentionalists&rdquo;) &mdash; e.g., Dretske (1995), Harman (1990), Leeds (1993), Lycan (1987, 1996), Rey (1991), Thau (2002), Tye (1995, 2000, 2009) &mdash; and phenomenalists (also called &ldquo;phenomenists&rdquo;) &mdash; e.g., Block (1996, 2003), Chalmers (1996,2004), Evans (1982), Loar (2003a, 2003b), Peacocke (1983, 1989, 1992, 2001), Raffman (1995), Shoemaker (1990). Representationalists claim that the phenomenal character of a mental state is reducible to a kind of intentional content, naturalistically construed (a la Dretske). Phenomenalists claim that the phenomenal character of a mental state is not so reducible. The representationalist thesis is often formulated as the claim that phenomenal properties are representational or intentional. However, this formulation is ambiguous between a reductive and a non-reductive claim (though the term &lsquo;representationalism&rsquo; is most often used for the reductive claim). (See Chalmers 2004a.) On one hand, it could mean that the phenomenal content of an experience is a kind of intentional content (i.e., the objective qualitative properties it represents). On the other, it could mean that the intrinsic, subjective phenomenal properties of an experience determine an intentional content. Representationalists such as Dretske, Lycan and Tye would assent to the former claim, whereas phenomenalists such as Block, Chalmers, Loar and Peacocke would assent to the latter. (Among phenomenalists, there is further disagreement about whether qualia are intrinsically representational (Loar) or not (Block, Peacocke). (So-called &ldquo;Ganzfeld&rdquo; experiences, in which, for example, the visual field is completely taken up with a uniform experience of a single color, are a standard test case: Do Ganzfeld experiences represent anything? It may be that doubts about the representationality of such experiences is simply a consequence of the fact that (outside the laboratory) we never encounter things that would produce them. Supposing we routinely did (and especially if we had names for them), it seems unlikely such skepticism would arise.) Most (reductive) representationalists are motivated by the conviction that one or another naturalistic explanation of intentionality (see the next section) is, in broad outline, correct, and by the desire to complete the naturalization of the mental by applying such theories to the problem of phenomenality. (Needless to say, most phenomenalists (Chalmers is the major exception) are just as eager to naturalize the phenomenal &mdash; though not in the same way.) The main argument for representationalism appeals to the transparency of experience (cf. Tye 2000: 45&ndash;51). The properties that characterize what it's like to have a perceptual experience are presented in experience as properties of objects perceived: in attending to an experience, one seems to &ldquo;see through it&rdquo; to the objects and properties it is experiences of . [ 2 ] They are not presented as properties of the experience itself. If nonetheless they were properties of the experience, perception would be massively deceptive. But perception is not massively deceptive. According to the representationalist, the phenomenal character of an experience is due to its representing objective, non-experiential properties. (In veridical perception, these properties are locally instantiated; in illusion and hallucination, they are not.) On this view, introspection is indirect perception: one comes to know what phenomenal features one's experience has by coming to know what objective features it represents. (Cf. also Dretske 1996, 1999.) In order to account for the intuitive differences between conceptual and sensory representations, representationalists appeal to structural or functional properties. Dretske (1995), for example, distinguishes experiences and thoughts on the basis of the origin and nature of their functions: an experience of a property P is a state of a system whose evolved function is to indicate the presence of P in the environment; a thought representing the property P , on the other hand, is a state of a system whose assigned (learned) function is to calibrate the output of the experiential system. Rey (1991) takes both thoughts and experiences to be relations to sentences in the language of thought, and distinguishes them on the basis of (the functional roles of) such sentences' constituent predicates. Lycan (1987, 1996) distinguishes them in terms of their functional-computational profiles. Tye (2000) distinguishes them in terms of their functional roles and the intrinsic structure of their vehicles: thoughts are representations in a language-like medium, whereas experiences are image-like representations consisting of &ldquo;symbol-filled arrays.&rdquo; (Cf. the account of mental images in Tye 1991.) Phenomenalists tend to make use of the same sorts of features (function, intrinsic structure) in explaining some of the intuitive differences between thoughts and experiences; but they do not suppose that such features exhaust the differences between phenomenal and non-phenomenal representations. For the phenomenalist, it is the phenomenal properties of experiences &mdash; qualia themselves &mdash; that constitute the fundamental difference between experience and thought. Peacocke (1992), for example, develops the notion of a perceptual &ldquo;scenario&rdquo; (an assignment of phenomenal properties to coordinates of a three-dimensional egocentric space), whose content is &ldquo;correct&rdquo; (a semantic property) if in the corresponding &ldquo;scene&rdquo; (the portion of the external world represented by the scenario) properties are distributed as their phenomenal analogues are in the scenario. Another sort of representation appealed to by some phenomenalists (e.g., Chalmers (2003), Block (2003)) is what Chalmers calls a &ldquo;pure phenomenal concept.&rdquo; A phenomenal concept in general is a concept whose denotation is a phenomenal property, and it may be discurive (&lsquo;the color of ripe bananas&lsquo;), demonstrative (&lsquo; this color&rsquo;; Loar 1996)), or even more direct. On Chalmers's view, a pure phenomenal concept is (something like) a conceptual/phenomenal hybrid consisting of a phenomenological &ldquo;sample&rdquo; (an image or an occurrent sensation) integrated with (or functioning as) a conceptual component. Phenomenal concepts are postulated to account for the apparent fact (among others) that, as McGinn (1991b) puts it, &ldquo;you cannot form [introspective] concepts of conscious properties unless you yourself instantiate those properties.&rdquo; One cannot have a phenomenal concept of a phenomenal property P , and, hence, phenomenal beliefs about P , without having experience of P , because P itself is (in some way) constitutive of the concept of P . (Cf. Jackson 1982, 1986 and Nagel 1974.) (Chalmers (2004b) puts pure phenomenal concepts to use in defending the Knowledge Argument against physicalism. Alter and Walter 2007 is an excellent collection of essays on phenomenal concepts.) 5. Imagery Though imagery has played an important role in the history of philosophy of mind, the important contemporary literature on it is primarily psychological. (McGinn 2004 is a notable recent exception.) In a series of psychological experiments done in the 1970s (summarized in Kosslyn 1980 and Shepard and Cooper 1982), subjects' response time in tasks involving mental manipulation and examination of presented figures was found to vary in proportion to the spatial properties (size, orientation, etc.) of the figures presented. The question of how these experimental results are to be explained kindled a lively debate on the nature of imagery and imagination. Kosslyn (1980) claims that the results suggest that the tasks were accomplished via the examination and manipulation of mental representations that themselves have spatial properties &mdash; i.e., pictorial representations, or images . Others, principally Pylyshyn (1979, 1981a, 1981b, 2003), argue that the empirical facts can be explained in terms exclusively of discursive , or propositional representations and cognitive processes defined over them. (Pylyshyn takes such representations to be sentences in a language of thought.) The idea that pictorial representations are literally pictures in the head is not taken seriously by proponents of the pictorial view of imagery (see, e.g., Kosslyn a