--> Self-Knowledge (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy/Winter 2021 Edition) Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Archive Winter 2021 Edition Menu Browse Table of Contents New in this Archive Chronological Archives About Editorial Information About the SEP Editorial Board How to Cite the SEP Special Characters Contact Support SEP Support the SEP PDFs for SEP Friends Make a Donation SEPIA for Libraries Entry Navigation Entry Contents Bibliography Academic Tools Friends PDF Preview Author and Citation Info Back to Top Self-Knowledge First published Fri Feb 7, 2003; substantive revision Tue Nov 9, 2021 In philosophy, &ldquo;self-knowledge&rdquo; standardly refers to knowledge of one&rsquo;s own mental states&mdash;that is, of what one is feeling or thinking, or what one believes or desires. At least since Descartes, most philosophers have believed that self-knowledge differs markedly from our knowledge of the external world (where this includes our knowledge of others&rsquo; mental states). But there is little agreement about what precisely distinguishes self-knowledge from knowledge in other realms. Partly because of this disagreement, philosophers have endorsed competing accounts of how we achieve self-knowledge and of its epistemic status. These accounts have important consequences for a broad range of issues in epistemology, the philosophy of mind, and moral psychology. This entry focuses on knowledge of one&rsquo;s own mental states. A separate topic sometimes referred to as &ldquo;self-knowledge&rdquo; is knowledge about a persisting self. This topic is addressed in a supplement: Knowledge of the Self . 1. The Distinctiveness of Self-Knowledge 1.1 Epistemic security 1.2 Special method 1.3 Agency 1.4 First-person authority 2. Doubts about the distinctiveness of self-knowledge 2.1 General doubts 2.2 Doubts based on empirical results 3. Accounts of Self-Knowledge 3.1 Acquaintance Accounts 3.2 Inner Sense Accounts 3.3 Self-Interpretation Accounts 3.4 Empiricist Transparency Accounts 3.5 Reasons Accounts 3.6 Rationalist Accounts 3.7 Agentialist Accounts 3.8 Expressivist Accounts Bibliography Works Cited Further Reading Academic Tools Other Internet Resources Related Entries 1. The Distinctiveness of Self-Knowledge What is special about self-knowledge, compared to knowledge in other domains? Self-knowledge is thought to differ from other sorts of knowledge in one or more of the following ways. Self-knowledge is especially secure, epistemically. Self-knowledge is (sometimes) acquired by use of an exclusively first-personal method. Our capacity for self-knowledge reflects our cognitive agency. One&rsquo;s pronouncements about one&rsquo;s own mental states carry a special authority or presumption of truth. The differences between these are subtle. Statement (1) identifies the distinctive feature of self-knowledge as the epistemic status of a certain class of beliefs, whereas statement (2) identifies it by the method one uses in forming these beliefs. Statement (3) emphasizes the subject&rsquo;s agency, typically in relation to attitudes like beliefs and intentions, which are sensitive to reasons. Statement (4) focuses on the way that self-ascriptions of mental states, such as saying &ldquo;I&rsquo;m in pain&rdquo;, are treated by others. Statements (1) and (2) are ways of cashing out the notion that we enjoy &ldquo;privileged access&rdquo; to our own mental states. Only these first two statements construe the distinctive feature of self-knowledge as plainly epistemic; however, most who endorse (3) also claim that this agential relation grounds a special epistemic relation. A minority of philosophers denies that self-knowledge is special at all (see Section 2). 1.1 Epistemic security The strongest epistemic claims on behalf of self-knowledge are infallibility and omniscience. One is infallible about one&rsquo;s own mental states if and only if (hereafter, &ldquo; iff &rdquo;) one cannot have a false belief to the effect that one is in a certain mental state. One is omniscient about one&rsquo;s own states iff being in a mental state suffices for knowing that one is in that state. (This omniscience thesis is sometimes expressed by saying that mental states are self-intimating or self-presenting .) Few if any contemporary philosophers maintain that we are infallible or omniscient about all of our mental states. Here is a simple example that challenges both infallibility and omniscience. Kate trusts her therapist&rsquo;s insights into her own psychology, and so she believes him when he tells her that she distrusts her mother. But the therapist is mistaken&mdash;in fact, Kate trusts her mother. Hence, Kate&rsquo;s self-ascription I distrust my mother shows that she is fallible about her own attitudes (mistakenly taking herself to distrust her mother) and that she is not omniscient (she fails to recognize that she trusts her mother). In the case described, Kate&rsquo;s belief about her attitude is based on the testimony of another person. A more restricted infallibility thesis would limit the relevant domain to self-ascriptions based on an exclusively first-personal method&mdash;perhaps introspection . Descartes thought that we could in principle achieve infallibility in this circumscribed realm, but only by exercising meticulous care: There remains sensations, emotions and appetites. These may be clearly perceived provided we take great care in our judgments concerning them to include no more than what is strictly contained in our perception&mdash;no more than that of which we have inner awareness. But this is a very difficult rule to observe, at least with regard to sensations. (Descartes 1644/1984: I.66, p. 216) A common objection to even restricted infallibility claims is the idea, often attributed to Wittgenstein, that where one cannot be wrong, one cannot be right either. For instance, Wright maintains that the possibility of error is required for concept application, which is in turn required for substantial self-knowledge.&ldquo;[E]rror&mdash;if only second-order error&mdash;has to be possible, if a genuine exercise of concepts is involved&rdquo; (Wright 1989: 634). In its unqualified form, the omniscience thesis seems even less plausible than the unqualified infallibility thesis. [ 1 ] On pain of regress, omniscience seems to require that self-knowledge is not always a matter of grasping one mental state by being in another: that is, it seems to require that some mental states comprehend themselves (so to speak). James rejected this idea. No subjective state, whilst present, is its own object; its object is always something else. (James 1884: 2) Some modify the omniscience thesis by claiming that, for some states, anyone who is in a state of that kind is justified in believing that she is, even if the thinker doesn&rsquo;t actually have this belief (Peacocke 1999; Siewert 1998; Silins 2012; Smithies 2012). Horgan and Kriegel (2007) defend a modified omniscience thesis, based on the idea that sensations are by definition conscious. Others argue that we are infallible or omniscient about our beliefs and other attitudes because there is a constitutive connection between the first-order attitude and the belief that one has that attitude (see 3.6 and 3.7). This connection varies. On some views, so long as we are rational and have the relevant concepts, believing that p constitutes a belief that one believes that p (Shoemaker 1994). Others reverse the constitution relation: taking oneself to believe that p can constitute believing that p (Coliva 2012a, Bauman 2017). Claims of infallibility and omniscience concern general relations between beliefs about mental states and those mental states themselves. The most famous philosophical argument involving self-knowledge, Descartes&rsquo; cogito argument (Descartes 1641/1895), does not concern these general relations. Instead, it concerns the certainty of a particular instance of belief. Descartes aims to demonstrate that, so long as you are carefully attending to your own thoughts, you can know with certain that you&rsquo;re thinking&mdash;and, hence, that you exist. This can be certain even if there is a supremely powerful evil genius who controls your thoughts and seeks to deceive you. Perhaps the most widely accepted view along these lines is that self-knowledge, even if not absolutely certain, is more secure, epistemically, than other kinds of empirical knowledge&mdash;most obviously, perceptual knowledge. Some who take this line maintain that there is a causal gap between a perceptual state and its object, and this gap introduces sources of error that are absent in direct introspective apprehension of a sensation (Russell 1917; Chalmers 2003; Gertler 2012; Horgan 2012; Siewert 2012). 1.2 Special method Most philosophers accept that there is some method of grasping one&rsquo;s own mental states that is special in the sense that it is available exclusively to the subject. Traditionally, this special method was construed as a kind of &ldquo;inward&rdquo; gaze, directed at the mental state to be grasped. The term &ldquo;introspection&rdquo;&rsquo;&mdash;literally, &ldquo;looking within&rdquo;&mdash;captures a traditional way of conceiving how we grasp our own mental states. This term uses a spatial metaphor to express a divide between the &ldquo;inner&rdquo; world of thought and the &ldquo;external&rdquo; world. The term &ldquo;introspection&rdquo; is used in various ways in the self-knowledge literature. Perhaps the most common usage is that suggested by the term&rsquo;s literal meaning: on this usage, introspection is inner observation&mdash;or &ldquo;inwardly directed attention&rdquo; (Goldman 2006: 246)&mdash;that, when successful, yields awareness of a mental state. The notion that inner observation is the special method by which we achieve self-knowledge is central to the acquaintance and inner sense accounts (see 3.1 and 3.2 below). While the term &ldquo;introspection&rdquo; connotes a looking within, a view that has recently gained prominence envisions the method unique to self-knowledge as requiring precisely the opposite. On this view, we ascertain our own thoughts by looking outward, to the states of the world they represent. This is known as the transparency method, in that self-knowledge is achieved by &ldquo;looking through&rdquo; the (transparent) mental state, directly to the state of the world it represents. This view is associated with a famous passage from Evans. [I]n making a self-ascription of belief, one&rsquo;s eyes are, so to speak, or occasionally literally, directed outward&mdash;upon the world. If someone asks me &ldquo;Do you think there is going to be a third world war?&rdquo;, I must attend, in answering him, to precisely the same outward phenomena as I would attend to if I were answering the question &ldquo;Will there be a third world war?&rdquo; (Evans 1982: 225) The idea that the special method by which we achieve self-knowledge involves transparency is central to empiricist transparency accounts (see 3.4 ) and to some agentialist accounts (see 3.7 ). 1.3 Agency Many of our mental states, such as itches and tickles, are states we simply undergo. But some argue that others are active. &ldquo;Our rational beliefs and intentions are not mere mental attitudes, but active states of normative commitment&rdquo; (Korsgaard 2009: 39). This idea inspires the claim, central to many versions of agentialism, that the truly distinctive kind of self-knowledge is knowledge of these &ldquo;active states of normative commitment&rdquo; (see 3.7 ). Such self-knowledge is distinctive because believing and intending are things we do . According to these agentialists, this means that rational beliefs and intentions are not known simply through observation, which is the means by which we know other empirical phenomena (including sensations). 1.4 First-person authority The views just described take the subject to be in a special epistemic position, vis-&agrave;-vis her own mental states. But a competing approach, sometimes attributed to Wittgenstein (Wright 1989), maintains that the special authority of self-ascriptions is primarily a matter of social-linguistic practices, which dictate that we should treat subjects as authoritative about their own states. On this view, one who responds to a self-ascription like &ldquo;I believe that it&rsquo;s raining&rdquo; with &ldquo;no, you don&rsquo;t&rdquo; (in ordinary circumstances) exhibits a misunderstanding of social-linguistic norms. The first-person authority view diagnoses the authority granted to self-ascriptions as deriving from social norms rather than from the subject's privileged epistemic position. Strictly speaking, then, this position is not concerned with self- knowledge . However, some contemporary expressivist accounts (see 3.8 ) regard the phenomenon of first-person authority as centrally important to understanding self-knowledge. 2. Doubts about the distinctiveness of self-knowledge 2.1 General doubts The idea that self-knowledge is not profoundly special was especially prevalent during the heyday of behaviorism. For instance, Ryle (1949) suggests that the difference between self-knowledge and other-knowledge is at most a matter of degree, and stems from the mundane fact that each of us is always present to observe our own behavior. Doubts about self-knowledge are also fueled by more general epistemological concerns, such as doubts about the possibility of theory-free observations (Dennett 1991), and the familiar worry that the observational process unavoidably alters the target of observation (Hill 1991). [ 2 ] Others argue that while self-attributions may express self-knowledge, they are not epistemically superior to other kinds of beliefs. I suspect &hellip; [that our] judgments about the world to a large extent drive our judgments about our experience. Properly so, since the former are the more secure. (Schwitzgebel 2008: 268) In the same vein, some (including Stich 1983) deny that self-knowledge is special, relative to knowledge of others&rsquo; states, by claiming that ordinary (&ldquo;folk&rdquo;) concepts of psychological states are theoretical concepts. If psychological states are theoretical entities, both self-ascriptions and other-ascriptions will proceed by inference from observed data&mdash;presumably, behavior. (See the entry on folk psychology as a theory .) Skepticism of a different kind stems from a puzzle raised by Boghossian (1989). On most accounts, attitudes such as desires and beliefs are individuated in part by their relations to other states and/or the environment. [ 3 ] For example, a desire for lemonade partly consists in being disposed to go to the refrigerator when one believes that there is lemonade there, and to feeling happy at the prospect of drinking lemonade. Believing there is lemonade in the refrigerator partly consists in being disposed to go to the refrigerator when one desires lemonade, and to feeling surprise if one finds the refrigerator empty. More generally, dispositional (or &ldquo;standing&rdquo;) beliefs and desires consist, partly or wholly, in dispositions to reason, behave, and affectively react in certain ways, relative to circumstances ( see the entry on belief ). Boghossian&rsquo;s puzzle concerns how we could have privileged access to our relationally-individuated mental states. He considers three ways that self-knowledge could be achieved: (a) on the basis of inner observation, (b) on the basis of inference, or (c) on the basis of nothing. He argues that (a) would not allow for knowledge of relationally-individuated states, and that (b) and (c) do not provide for access that is truly privileged. The result is a trilemma regarding self-knowledge. Philosophers have responded to Boghossian&rsquo;s trilemma in a variety of ways. Some deny the assumption that recognizing a relationally-individuated state requires identifying the relational properties that make it the state that it is (Burge 1988; Heil 1988). Others argue that self-knowledge can be privileged even if it rests on inference (Dretske 1994; Byrne 2005; Lawlor 2009). And some maintain that we can know our attitudes through introspective observation, and that this weakens the case for relational construals of attitudes (Pitt 2004). 2.2 Doubts based on empirical results Empirical work in psychology constitutes another source of doubt about the epistemic status of self-ascriptions. In a widely cited paper, Nisbett and Wilson (1977) present studies showing that subjects routinely misidentify the factors that influenced their reasoning processes. For instance, subjects in one study explained their preference for a product by its apparent quality, when in fact the products were all precisely alike: the subjects&rsquo; preferences were apparently driven by the product&rsquo;s spatial position relative to its competitors seemed to drive the preferences. The accuracy of subject reports is so poor as to suggest that any introspective access that may exist is not sufficient to produce generally correct or reliable reports. (1977: 33) While these studies are instructive, Wilson acknowledges that their results are limited in that they apply only to the unconscious sources of decisions; they are silent as to our privileged access to our current states. [T]o the extent that people&rsquo;s responses are caused by the conscious self, they have privileged access to the actual causes of these responses; in short, the Nisbett and Wilson argument was wrong about such cases. (Wilson 2002: 106) Schwitzgebel (2002) has marshalled other sorts of empirical evidence to show that introspective reports are unreliable. But he has also suggested that our attitudes about introspection may be particularly obstinate. This conclusion is borne out by his collaboration with a psychologist on a study of introspection using a method called Experience Sampling (Hurlburt and Schwitzgebel 2007). Strikingly, their careful analysis of the study&rsquo;s results does not resolve their differences about the reliability of introspection: Hurlburt remains &ldquo;optimistic&rdquo; about introspection&rsquo;s reliability while Schwitzgebel remains &ldquo;a skeptic&rdquo;). This outcome suggests that not only careful empirical work, but also difficult conceptual work, is required for determining the scope and degree of introspection&rsquo;s reliability&mdash;solving what Goldman aptly terms &ldquo;the problem of calibration&rdquo; (Goldman 2004: 14). Some targets of introspection, such as sensations, can be identified only through introspection itself: third-personal methods (for instance, identifying pain via a brain scan) depend on prior correlations between third-personal and introspective data. Goldman notes that, for this reason, we can fix the range of introspective reliability only by using introspection and evaluating its results for internal coherence and for consistency with other sources. But since there is no clear consensus as to how to evaluate the results of introspection, or how to weigh its results against other sources of evidence about mental states, the problem of calibration is especially thorny and complex as it relates to introspection. Spener (2015) proposes that we calibrate introspection by reference to abilities that we could not possess unless introspection were reliable (relative to certain circumstances, and about certain states). For example, our ability to focus binoculars on a distant object suggests that introspection is reliable in identifying when things look blurry. 3. Accounts of Self-Knowledge Accounts of self-knowledge vary across a number of dimensions, including: how self-knowledge is achieved; the kind and degree of epistemic security that self-ascriptions possess; the nature of our (epistemic) privilege and (social-linguistic) authority relative to our mental states; and the role of our observational, rational, agential, and expressive powers in explaining first-person privilege and authority. These accounts also differ as to their scope. Acquaintance theorists mainly aim to explain how we know what we&rsquo;re currently thinking and feeling (our &ldquo;occurrent&rdquo; states). Reasons theorists and Agentialists are exclusively concerned with self-knowledge of those attitudes that represent our commitments, such as beliefs and intentions. Proponents of the Inner Sense, Self-Interpretation, Empiricist Transparency, Rationalist, and Expressivist accounts differ as to the scope of these accounts. Each of these is taken, by at least one of its proponents, to apply to all kinds of mental states. This variety means that hybrid views are possible. For instance, one might think that an Acquaintance account explains how we know our sensations while Agentialism best explains self-knowledge of beliefs. In what follows, I proceed from broadly empiricist accounts, which take self-knowledge to be a form of empirical knowledge, to accounts that emphasize the role of a priori reasoning in self-knowledge, and finally to accounts that take the special features of self-knowledge to derive from our capacity for agency or self-expression. 3.1 Acquaintance Accounts The idea that we know our mental states through acquaintance with them is usually associated with Russell (1917), but such accounts trace their lineage at least to Descartes (see the entry on knowledge by acquaintance vs. description ). According to these accounts, our awareness of our mental states is sometimes peculiarly direct in both an epistemic sense and a metaphysical sense. It is epistemically direct in that I need not rely on awareness of something else in order to be aware of my mental state. It is metaphysically direct in that no event or process mediates between my awareness and the mental state itself. By contrast, my awareness of last night&rsquo;s rain is epistemically indirect in that I achieve it only through being aware of something else (such as the wet pavement). This awareness is metaphysically indirect in that various factors, including the wet pavement and perhaps my visual experience thereof, mediate between my awareness of the rain and the rain itself. Acquaintance accounts hold special appeal for epistemic foundationalists, who claim that all of our knowledge rests on a foundation of beliefs that are justified, but not justified by other beliefs. The claim that introspective access is both epistemically and metaphysically direct is most plausible for sensations like pain. This is because how a sensation appears&mdash;how it seems to the subject&mdash;and how it actually is (its nature) are, according to many philosophers, one and the same. That is, &ldquo;there is no appearance/reality distinction in the case of sensations&rdquo; (Hill 1991: 127; compare Kripke 1980: 152&ndash;3). Limiting acquaintance accounts to self-knowledge of sensations&mdash;or, more strictly, to self-knowledge of mental states individuated by phenomenology&mdash;does not entirely fix their scope, as philosophers disagree as to which kinds of mental states are individuated by phenomenology. Recently, the idea that thoughts have a distinctive phenomenology has received renewed attention (see the entry on consciousness and intentionality ). Pitt (2004) uses the fact that we seem able to know what we&rsquo;re thinking in a direct, highly secure way&mdash;one that is best explained by an acquaintance model of introspection&mdash;to argue that thoughts have distinctive phenomenological properties with which we are acquainted. Some philosophers also argue that conscious attitudes, such as judgments, have distinctive phenomenologies. The purported epistemic and metaphysical directness of introspection does not imply that we are either infallible or omniscient about our own states, since it is an open question whether all of our states are introspectible. But if introspection involves epistemically