--> Agency (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy/Winter 2018 Edition) Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Archive Winter 2018 Edition Menu Browse Table of Contents New in this Archive Chronological Archives About Editorial Information About the SEP Editorial Board How to Cite the SEP Special Characters Contact Support SEP Support the SEP PDFs for SEP Friends Make a Donation SEPIA for Libraries Entry Navigation Entry Contents Bibliography Academic Tools Friends PDF Preview Author and Citation Info Back to Top Agency First published Mon Aug 10, 2015 In very general terms, an agent is a being with the capacity to act, and &lsquo;agency&rsquo; denotes the exercise or manifestation of this capacity. The philosophy of action provides us with a standard conception and a standard theory of action. The former construes action in terms of intentionality, the latter explains the intentionality of action in terms of causation by the agent&rsquo;s mental states and events. From this, we obtain a standard conception and a standard theory of agency. There are alternative conceptions of agency, and it has been argued that the standard theory fails to capture agency (or distinctively human agency). Further, it seems that genuine agency can be exhibited by beings that are not capable of intentional action, and it has been argued that agency can and should be explained without reference to causally efficacious mental states and events. Debates about the nature of agency have flourished over the past few decades in philosophy and in other areas of research (including psychology, cognitive neuroscience, social science, and anthropology). In philosophy, the nature of agency is an important issue in the philosophy of mind, the philosophy of psychology, the debates on free will and moral responsibility, in ethics, meta-ethics, and in the debates on the nature of reasons and practical rationality. For the most part, this entry focuses on conceptual and metaphysical questions concerning the nature of agency. In the final sections, it provides an overview of empirically informed accounts of the sense of agency and of various empirical challenges to the commonsense assumption that our reasons and our conscious intentions make a real difference to how we act. 1. Introduction 2. Conceptions, theories, and kinds of agency 2.1 Agency as intentional action 2.2 Agency as initiation by the agent 2.3 Agency and distinctively human action 2.4 Agency without mental representations 2.5 Other kinds of agency: mental, shared, collective, relational, artificial 3. The metaphysics of agency 3.1 Three metaphysical frameworks 3.2 Deviant causal chains 3.3 Disappearing agents, naturalism, and dual standpoint theory 3.4 Actions, events, processes, and omissions 4. The sense of agency 5. Empirical challenges and the role of consciousness Bibliography Academic Tools Other Internet Resources Related Entries 1. Introduction In a very broad sense, agency is virtually everywhere. Whenever entities enter into causal relationships, they can be said to act on each other and interact with each other, bringing about changes in each other. In this very broad sense, it is possible to identify agents and agency, and patients and patiency, virtually everywhere. [ 1 ] Usually, though, the term &lsquo;agency&rsquo; is used in a much narrower sense to denote the performance of intentional actions. This way of thinking about agency has a long history in philosophy and it can be traced back to Hume and Aristotle, among other historical figures. In contemporary analytic philosophy, it is most commonly associated with the influential work of Anscombe (1957) and Davidson (1963). Anscombe&rsquo;s and Davidson&rsquo;s views differ significantly in many respects, but they share the central doctrine that action is to be explained in terms of the intentionality of intentional action. In the debates that followed, the philosophy of action revolved largely around the notion of intentional action. For some time, the term &lsquo;agency&rsquo; was rarely used, and if it was, it was usually taken to refer to the exercise of the capacity to perform intentional actions. [ 2 ] This has changed in the more recent debate, where talk about agency has become more and more common in many areas of philosophy (and in other areas of research). [ 3 ] To some extent, this focus on the notion of agency has been fuelled by a resistance to the assimilation of agency to intentional action. As we will see in the following section, this resistance amounts in some cases to the rejection of the standard conception of action, in some cases it amounts to the rejection of the standard theory of action, and in some it amounts to the more modest claim that there are different kinds of agency. 2. Conceptions, theories, and kinds of agency The contributions of Anscombe and Davidson have established a standard conception of action, and Davidson&rsquo;s work has provided the groundwork for a standard theory of action. At the core of the standard conception are the following two claims. First, the notion of intentional action is more fundamental than the notion of action. In particular, action is to be explained in terms of the intentionality of intentional action. Second, there is a close connection between intentional action and acting for a reason. There are two ways of spelling out the first claim (which correspond to two different views on the individuation of actions; see section 3.4 ). According to the first, one and the same event can be more than one action under different descriptions , and an event is an action just in case it is an intentional action under some description. An action, that is, may be intentional under some description and unintentional under others (Anscombe 1957; Davidson 1963). Suppose that you alert the burglar by turning on the light, and suppose that this is one event that is intentional under the description &lsquo;turning on the light&rsquo;, but not under &lsquo;alerting the burglar&rsquo;. On this view, alerting the burglar is nevertheless something that you do, given that the event is an intentional action under some description. According to a second way of spelling out the first claim, something is an action either if it is identical with or &ldquo;generated by&rdquo; an intentional action (Goldman 1970; see also Ginet 1990). [ 4 ] On this view, alerting the burglar is an action of yours either if it is an intentional action or if it is generated by an intentional action (your turning on the light, in this case). If it is merely generated by an intentional action, it is an unintentional action of yours. On both views, intentional action is more fundamental than action itself: action derives from and is dependent on intentional action. [ 5 ] According to the second claim of the standard conception, there is a close connection between acting intentionally and acting for a reason. According to Anscombe and Davidson&rsquo;s early view, this close connection is identity. Following Aristotle, they both held the view that to act intentionally is to act for a reason, and that to act for a reason is to act in a way that can be rationalized by the premises of a sound practical syllogism, which consists, typically, of a major premise that corresponds to the agent&rsquo;s goal and a minor premise that corresponds to the agent&rsquo;s take on how to attain the goal. Furthermore, Davidson held the view that having an intention consists in having a desire and a belief that correspond to the major and the minor premise of the relevant syllogism (Davidson 1963, 1970; see also Goldman 1970; Audi 1986). [ 6 ] One can still find a fairly widespread commitment to this desire-belief version of the standard conception (in the philosophy of mind, the philosophy of psychology, ethics, meta-ethics, and in other areas of research). In the philosophy of action, however, it is now widely thought that intentions cannot be reduced to desires and beliefs (and combinations thereof). On this view, intentions play a crucial and irreducible role in practical reasoning, long-term planning, and in the initiation and guidance of action (see, especially, Bratman 1987; see also Harman 1976; Brand 1984; Bishop 1989; Mele 1992, 2003; En&ccedil; 2003). It is nevertheless still widely accepted that there is a close connection between intentional action and acting for reasons and that intentional actions are typically performed for reasons (Mele and Moser 1994; Mele 2003; En&ccedil; 2003; Clarke 2010b, for instance). The standard conception is not committed to a particular account of what it is to act intentionally and for reasons, and it is not committed to a particular account of the nature of reason explanations. It is important to distinguish the standard conception from the standard theory , which provides a causal account of intentional action and reason explanation. This theory says, very roughly, that something is an intentional action and done for reasons just in case it is caused by the right mental states and events in the right way. The right mental states and events are states and events that rationalize the action from the agent&rsquo;s point of view (such as desires, beliefs, and intentions). The right way of causation is non-deviant causation (see section 3.2 ). On this view, a reason explanation is an explanation in terms of mental states and events that cause the action and that rationalize it from the agent&rsquo;s point of view (typically by providing a means-end rationale). This theory is often called &ldquo;the causal theory of action&rdquo;. Strictly speaking, it is an event-causal theory and it consists of an event-causal theory of reason explanation and an event-causal theory of intentional action. In conjunction with the standard conception, this causal theory provides us with a theory of action, which has been the standard theory in the contemporary philosophy of mind and action (see also the entry on action ). As indicated, the standard conception is compatible with non-causal theories of intentional action and reason explanation. It is generally agreed that a reason explanation of an action usually renders the action intelligible by revealing the agent&rsquo;s goal or intention. According to non-causal theories, having the relevant goals or intentions does not consist in the possession of causally efficacious mental states or events (Melden 1961; Ginet 1990; O&rsquo;Connor 2000; Sehon 2005). Non-causal theories are, however, widely rejected (the most influential critique is due to Davidson 1963; see also Goldman 1970: 76&ndash;85; Mele 2003: 38&ndash;51; Clarke 2003: 21&ndash;24). The standard conception is compatible, furthermore, with dual standpoint theories. We will turn to this view in section 3.3 . 2.1 Agency as intentional action The standard conception of action provides us with a conception of agency. According to this view, a being has the capacity to exercise agency just in case it has the capacity to act intentionally, and the exercise of agency consists in the performance of intentional actions and, in many cases, in the performance of unintentional actions (that derive from the performance of intentional actions; see section 2 ). Call this the standard conception of agency. The standard theory of action provides us with a theory of agency, according to which a being has the capacity to act intentionally just in case it has the right functional organization: just in case the instantiation of certain mental states and events (such as desires, beliefs, and intentions) would cause the right events (such as certain movements) in the right way. According to this standard theory of agency, the exercise of agency consists in the instantiation of the right causal relations between agent-involving states and events. (Proponents include Davidson 1963, 1971; Goldman 1970; Brand 1984; Bratman 1987; Dretske 1988; Bishop 1989; Mele 1992, 2003; En&ccedil; 2003.) The most serious problem for this standard theory has been the problem of deviant causal chains. Further, some have argued that this view altogether fails to capture agency, because it reduces actions to mere happenings. We will turn to those issues in section 3 . Recently, it has been argued that reasons for actions cannot be the causes of actions, because reasons are facts or states of affairs, not mental states or events (Dancy 2000; Alvarez 2010). But the standard theory is not committed to the claim that reasons are identical with mental entities. It is, in particular, compatible with the view that reasons are the things that are represented by the contents of the relevant mental states and events (see Scanlon 1998: 56&ndash;64; Mele 2003: 82&ndash;84; Setiya 2007: 28&ndash;31). 2.2 Agency as initiation by the agent It has often been claimed, and it is widely agreed, that agency involves the initiation of action by the agent. [ 7 ] But it has been controversial what this consists in. The standard conception is compatible with the claim that intentional actions are initiated by the agent, and proponents of the standard theory have argued that initiation can be explained in terms of causation by the agent&rsquo;s mental states and events. According to desire-belief versions of the view, initiation by the agent consists in causation by the relevant desire-belief pairs (Goldman 1970; Davidson 1971; Dretske 1988). According to more recent versions, initiation consists in causation by the relevant intentions (Brand 1984; Bratman 1987; Bishop 1989; Mele 1992, 2003; En&ccedil; 2003). Opponents of the standard conception argue, however, that an agent&rsquo;s power to initiate action cannot be reduced to the capacity to act intentionally and for reasons. They argue that the exercise of agency may be entirely spontaneous, in the sense that an agent may initiate an action for no reason and without prior intent. On this view, reasons and intentions may have a strong and even a decisive influence on how an agent acts. But agency has its source in the power to initiate, and the exercise of this power cannot be reduced to the agent&rsquo;s being moved by reasons or intentions. This is an alternative conception of agency (Ginet 1990; O&rsquo;Connor 2000; Lowe 2008; see also McCann 1998; for critical discussion see Mele 2003: 38&ndash;51, 71&ndash;76; Clarke 2003: 17&ndash;24). Proponents of this alternative conception reject the standard theory and they reject, more generally, any account of agency in terms of causal relations between agent-involving states and events. According to some, the initiation of action consists in irreducible agent-causation, others appeal to uncaused mental acts of the will. The main positions on this issue correspond to the main positions in the metaphysics of agency, to which we turn in section 3.1 . 2.3 Agency and distinctively human action In an influential article, Frankfurt (1971) argued that the difference between persons and other agents consists in the structure of their will. Only persons reflect on and care about their motivations. According to Frankfurt, this reflective evaluation of our motives usually results in the formation of second-order desires: desires that are directed at first-order desires (which are directed at goals and actions). When a person wants to have a certain desire and wants to be moved by it, then he or she is said to &ldquo;identify&rdquo; with the desire and its motivational efficacy. On this hierarchical account of agency, the role of higher-order attitudes is essential to the kind of agency that distinguishes persons from other agents. Taylor (1977) took this as a starting point for an account of distinctively human agency, under the assumption that the distinction between persons and non-persons is, essentially, the distinction between human and non-human agents. It is not entirely clear whether Frankfurt and Taylor meant to provide an alternative to the standard theory of agency or an extension of it. [ 8 ] On one reading, they accepted the account of intentional agency provided by the standard theory, and they proposed a hierarchical extension of the standard theory that captures the kind of agency that is distinctive of persons or human agents. (For an influential critique of such hierarchical accounts see Watson 1975.) According to Velleman (1992), Frankfurt&rsquo;s observation that an agent may fail to identify with a particular motive points to a fundamental flaw in the standard theory. As it seems always possible that an agent &ldquo;disowns&rdquo; the mental attitudes that cause an action, those attitudes do not &ldquo;add up to the agent&rsquo;s being involved&rdquo; (1992: 463). This shows, according to Velleman, that the standard theory captures, at best, actions that are defective. It fails, in particular, to capture &ldquo;human action par excellence &rdquo;, because it fails to account for the agent&rsquo;s participation. Velleman rejects the appeal to irreducible agent-causation (see section 3.1 ), and he argues that this leaves only one strategy for solving the problem: we must find a mental attitude that the agent cannot disown and that is, therefore, fit to play the role of the agent. We must, that is, find a mental attitude that is the agent, functionally speaking. According to Velleman, the desire to act in accordance with reasons is fit to play this role. Bratman (2000, 2001) agrees with Velleman that the standard theory does not explain genuine self-governance. On his view, though, an account of &ldquo;full-blown agency&rdquo;, as he calls it, does not require reference to a mental attitude that the agent cannot disown. Building on his work on temporally extended planning agency (Bratman 1987), he argues that an agent&rsquo;s &ldquo;self-governing policies&rdquo; have the &ldquo;authority to speak for the agent&rdquo;, because they help to establish and support the agent&rsquo;s identity across time, and because they specify which desires are to be treated as providing justifying reasons in practical deliberation. According to Bratman, these self-governing policies explain what it is for an agent &ldquo;to take a stand in favor of or against certain motivations, a stand that can itself be subject to reexamination and revision&rdquo; (2000: 50&ndash;51). (For a critical discussion of Bratman&rsquo;s account see Hornsby 2004.) In defense of the standard theory, Mele (2003: Ch. 10) has argued that the search for a mental attitude that plays the role of the agent is misguided and that Velleman&rsquo;s critique of the view is off target. As Mele points out, it seems clear that a desire cannot possibly be the agent, because agents deliberate, decide, and act. Desires do none of these things. He suggests that any talk of a mental attitude as playing the role of the agent can at best be metaphorical. Further, there is no obvious reason why an agent&rsquo;s failure to identify with a motive should be diagnosed in terms of the agent&rsquo;s failure to participate. It seems more plausible to suggest that the agent does participate in such cases, but in a defective manner. Once defective participation is distinguished from a failure to participate, it is easy to avoid Velleman&rsquo;s conclusion that the standard theory &ldquo;leaves out the agent&rdquo;. Moreover, one can then separate the question of whether the standard theory accounts for the agent&rsquo;s participation from the question of whether it captures human action par excellence . According to Mele, the human agent is simply a human being who acts. On this view, the agent does play some role in all instances of agency, no matter how deficient. The standard theory provides, first and foremost, an account of what it is for an agent to perform intentional actions. It does not claim that the capacity to perform intentional actions is the capacity that separates human from non-human agency, and it does not claim to give an account of more refined or excellent kinds of human agency, such as self-controlled, autonomous, wholehearted, or free agency. It is an interesting and important task to investigate whether or not the standard theory can be extended so as to account for the more refined or excellent kinds of human agency (Mele 1995; Bratman 2007, for instance). But to reject the view because it fails to do so is to misconstrue its aim and scope (see also section 3.3 ). pdf include--> 2.4 Agency without mental representations Arguments for the claim that the standard theory does not account for important aspects of agency are usually driven by a focus on distinctively human agency. Once we shift our focus to non-human agents, and simpler organisms, a very different challenge emerges. When we turn to such agents, it seems that the standard theory is clearly too demanding. The view explains agency in terms of the agent&rsquo;s desires, beliefs, and intentions. Usually, it is assumed that this is an explanation in terms of mental representations: in terms of intentional mental states and events that have representational contents (typically, propositional contents). It seems, however, that there are beings that are capable of genuine agency and that do not possess representational mental states. We can distinguish here between three claims (and three challenges). According to the first, there are non-human beings that are capable of agency and that do not possess representational mental states. Second, there are many instances of human agency that can and should be explained without the ascription of representational mental states. Third, all instances of agency can and should be explained without the ascription of representational mental states. We turn to each claim in turn. We have a pervasive tendency to interpret and explain behavior in terms of intentional mental states. We tend, even, to interpret the interaction between animated objects in terms of desires, beliefs, and intentions (Heider and Simmel 1944). This raises the question of when it is appropriate to attribute mental states in the explanation of behavior. According to an instrumentalist stance (Dennett 1987: Ch. 2), the question of when it is appropriate to ascribe mental states cannot be separated from the question of when it is appropriate to ascribe agency, and both questions are to be answered in terms of predictive success: it is appropriate to attribute mental states in the explanation of agency when doing so supports successful predictions of behavior. However, most proponents of the standard theory presume some form of realism, according to which the ascription of mental states is appropriate only if the agent in question possesses the right internal states with the right representational contents. The question of what the possession of representational mental states consists in is one of the most controversial questions in the philosophy of mind and cognitive science, and it is clearly beyond the scope of this entry (see the entries on mental representation and cognitive science ). Consider, though, the following remarks. Davidson (1982) held the view that only human agents have the relevant mental attitudes, because he thought that having such attitudes requires linguistic competence. Others have argued that we are justified in ascribing representational mental states to non-human agents if doing so provides the best explanation of their behavior (Allen and Bekoff 1997, for instance). Sometimes it is rather difficult to decide whether or not the best explanation of an agent&rsquo;s behavior requires the ascription of representational mental states. Sterelny (2001: Ch. 11, 12), for instance, has argued that plausible explanations in terms of desires can sometimes be replaced by equally good explanations in terms of drives. The ascription of a desire is usually construed as the ascription of a representational mental state, whereas a drive can be construed in terms of mo