The Comparative Study of Metacognition: Sharper Paradigms, Safer Inferences - PMC Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here's how you know Here's how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Search Log in Dashboard Publications Account settings Log out Search… Search NCBI Primary site navigation Search Logged in as: Dashboard Publications Account settings Log in Search PMC Full-Text Archive Search in PMC Journal List User Guide PERMALINK Copy As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with, the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. Learn more: PMC Disclaimer | PMC Copyright Notice Psychon Bull Rev . Author manuscript; available in PMC: 2015 Oct 15. Published in final edited form as: Psychon Bull Rev. 2008 Aug;15(4):679–691. doi: 10.3758/pbr.15.4.679 Search in PMC Search in PubMed View in NLM Catalog Add to search The Comparative Study of Metacognition: Sharper Paradigms, Safer Inferences J David Smith J David Smith 1 University at Buffalo, State University of New York Find articles by J David Smith 1 , Michael J Beran Michael J Beran 2 Language Research Center, Georgia State University Find articles by Michael J Beran 2 , Justin J Couchman Justin J Couchman 3 University at Buffalo, State University of New York Find articles by Justin J Couchman 3 , Mariana V C Coutinho Mariana V C Coutinho 4 University at Buffalo, State University of New York Find articles by Mariana V C Coutinho 4 Author information Copyright and License information 1 University at Buffalo, State University of New York 2 Language Research Center, Georgia State University 3 University at Buffalo, State University of New York 4 University at Buffalo, State University of New York ✉ Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to J. David Smith, 346 Park Hall, SUNY Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14260, psysmith@buffalo.edu J. David Smith, Department of Psychology and Center for Cognitive Science, University at Buffalo, State University of New York. Michael J. Beran, Language Research Center, Georgia State University. Justin Couchman, Department of Psychology, University at Buffalo, State University of New York. Mariana Coutinho, Department of Psychology, University at Buffalo, State University of New York. PMC Copyright notice PMCID: PMC4607312 NIHMSID: NIHMS726832 PMID: 18792496 The publisher's version of this article is available at Psychon Bull Rev Abstract Results that point to animals’ metacognitive capacity bear a heavy burden given the potential for competing behavioral descriptions. This article uses formal models to evaluate the force of these descriptions. One example is that many existing studies have directly rewarded so-called “uncertainty” responses. Modeling confirms that this practice is an interpretative danger because it supports associative processes and encourages simpler interpretations. Another example is that existing studies raise the concern that animals avoid difficult stimuli not because of uncertainty monitored but because of aversion given error-causing or reinforcement-lean stimuli. Modeling also justifies this concern and shows that this problem is not addressed by the common practice of comparing performance on Chosen and Forced trials. The models and related discussion have utility for metacognition researchers and theorists broadly because they specify the experimental operations that will best indicate a metacognitive capacity in humans or animals by eliminating alternative behavioral accounts. Keywords: metacognition, uncertainty monitoring, primate cognition, comparative psychology, rhesus monkeys Humans feel uncertain when they do not know or remember. They often respond appropriately to these feelings. These responses are the empirical phenomena that ground the literature on metacognition ( Flavell, 1979 ; Koriat, 1993 ; Nelson, 1992 ; Schwartz, 1994 ). The idea in this literature is that a cognitive executive in mind monitors perception and memory, judging its progress and prospects. This happens, for example, when we realize the difficulty of a passage in a scientific article and make deliberate efforts to grasp its meaning. These monitoring functions are assessed in the laboratory by collecting metacognitive judgments (e.g., feelings of knowing, confidence ratings). Researchers take humans’ metacognitive behavior to indicate important aspects of mind. They link metacognitive states to self-awareness (because uncertainty and doubt are so personal and subjective— Gallup, 1982 ) and to declarative consciousness (because humans so easily introspect and communicate these states— Koriat, 2007 ; Nelson, 1996 ). Metacognition is one of humans’ sophisticated cognitive capacities and it could be uniquely human ( Metcalfe &amp; Kober, 2005 ). This possibility makes it important to ask whether nonhuman animals (hereafter animals) have a similar capacity. Accordingly, Smith and his colleagues inaugurated a new area of comparative inquiry by asking whether animals have a capacity for cognitive monitoring ( Shields, Smith, &amp; Washburn, 1997 ; Smith, Schull, et al., 1995 ; Smith, Shields, Allendoerfer, &amp; Washburn, 1998 ; Smith, Shields, Schull, &amp; Washburn, 1997 ). Active research continues in this area ( Beran, Smith, Redford, &amp; Washburn, 2006 ; Call &amp; Carpenter, 2001 ; Foote &amp; Crystal, 2007 ; Hampton, 2001 ; Inman &amp; Shettleworth, 1999 ; Kornell, Son, &amp; Terrace, 2007 ; Washburn, Smith, &amp; Shields, 2006 ; see reviews in Smith, Shields, &amp; Washburn, 2003 ; Smith &amp; Washburn, 2005 ; Smith, 2007 ). In some of these studies, researchers presented a mix of easy and difficult trials. They gave animals (a dolphin, monkeys, pigeons, and rats) an additional response—beyond the primary discrimination responses—that let them decline to complete any trials they chose. Animals who accurately monitor cognition should recognize difficult trials as error-risking and decline those trials selectively. Some animals do so and produce data patterns in cognitive-monitoring tasks like those of humans. This additional response has come to be called the uncertainty response, and it is presently interpreted to show some species’ capacity for uncertainty monitoring and metacognition. If this interpretation is correct, these experiments tap theoretically important cognitive capacities in animals. They raise intriguing issues about animal mind, awareness, and consciousness, though they do not resolve them. They could help cognitive scientists reflect on the phylogenetic roots of human metacognition. They could also sharpen theoretical questions about human metacognition (e.g., how explicit is human cognition if animals show a more implicit form of this capacity; how dependent is human metacognition on verbal-symbolic representations if animals show a nonverbal form of this capacity). Finally, these experiments could also help reveal the ontogenetic roots of human metacognition. The simple, nonverbal, perceptual tasks suitable for animals are more appropriate for young human children than are the complex, verbal, and introspective metacognitive assessments that young children normally fail ( Acredolo &amp; O’Connor, 1991 ; Brown et al., 1983 ). However, this area of comparative research bears a heavy interpretative burden, for there is a long tradition in comparative psychology (e.g., Morgan, 1906 ) of explaining behavior at the lowest possible psychological level. Thus, even given performances by some animals that might indicate metacognition and uncertainty monitoring, one must consider carefully the alternative possibility that these performances might be explained using simpler, associative mechanisms. The existing paradigms illustrate this tension between explanatory frameworks. They often combine a psychophysical discrimination (in which one presents a range of trial difficulties including difficult trials near participants’ perceptual thresholds) with an uncertainty response (with which participants can decline to complete trials). In Foote and Crystal (2007) , the task was a duration discrimination in which Short or Long responses were correct for durations shorter or longer than 4 s. In Smith et al. (1997) , the task was a density discrimination in which Sparse or Dense responses were correct for sparser or denser pixel boxes. In both tasks, difficulty was varied to map participants’ response patterns in the region surrounding the breakpoint of the discrimination where rats could hardly tell Short from Long or monkeys Sparse from Dense. In fact, rats and monkeys most often declined the difficult trials near this breakpoint. These tasks ground the simulations in the present article. These paradigms illustrate some ongoing methodological concerns in the comparative metacognition literature. First, Foote and Crystal (2007) rewarded animal participants directly for their uncertainty responses. That is, rats were not only rewarded with food for every correct Short or Long response, but they also received a smaller food reward whenever they declined a trial. This is a common practice. Kornell et al. (2007) gave monkeys a reward for every uncertainty response because their animals were biased against making that response. Hampton (2001) gave monkeys food pellets for uncertainty responses compared to highly desired peanuts for correct responses. Suda-King (2007) gave orangutans one grape for uncertainty responses compared to two grapes for correct responses. Inman and Shettleworth (1999) gave pigeons small grain rewards for uncertainty responses compared to large grain rewards for correct responses. The potential problem with this approach is that it might grant the uncertainty response its own associative response strength independent of any uncertainty role it plays in a task. It might be used because of its reward properties. Thus, it is important to understand what role these reward properties play in existing comparative studies of animal metacognition, and in particular whether these properties could by themselves, absent any metacognitive assessment by the animal, produce the observed data patterns. One purpose of the present formal analyses is to evaluate this possibility. This evaluation is especially important given that many studies have used these food-rewarded uncertainty responses. Smith et al. (1997) illustrated a second potential problem with uncertainty paradigms. Researchers generally make reinforcement transparent by giving feedback on every trial. Every consequence is experienced and can be associated to the stimulus-response pairing that produced the negative or positive outcome. In particular, monkeys in Smith et al. (1997) were often wrong when they made Sparse or Dense responses for threshold stimuli. Then they were denied rewards and received a timeout period. Perhaps, then, the threshold stimuli and Sparse and Dense responses in those stimulus contexts came to be aversive for the monkeys. Perhaps they were conditioned not to use those responses in those stimulus contexts. In contrast, when monkeys declined threshold stimuli, the outcome—a transition to the next trial—was in a sense more neutral. Perhaps, then, the monkeys were conditioned to use the uncertainty response in those stimulus contexts. If so, the function of the uncertainty response would have been to avoid aversive stimuli, not to express uncertainty about difficult trials. Aversion-avoidance and uncertainty monitoring are different psychological interpretations at different psychological levels. A second purpose of the present formal analyses is to evaluate the weight this associative interpretation should be given. We deliberately target our own paradigm in this case to make it clear that we include our own research in this article’s partially negative assessment. The paradigm of Foote and Crystal (2007) also illustrates the common attempt to address the aversion-avoidance confound by intermixing trials in which the animal can choose to respond uncertain with trials in which the animal is forced to complete the trial. The rationale behind this approach is as follows. Animals may have privileged metacognitive knowledge about whether they will likely get a trial correct. If so, then when they choose to accept a trial (by not responding uncertain), they should show strong performance because they will accept the trials that have a good metacognitive feel. In contrast, Forced trials would include some felicitous trials the animal would have accepted and some trials the animal would have declined because they had a bad metacognitive feel. Thus, animals should show poorer performance on Forced trials than on Chosen trials. There is a current view that this Chosen-Forced advantage protects one from associative interpretations based in aversion, avoidance, and reinforcement history, and that it is a strong index for animal metacognition (see also Inman &amp; Shettleworth, 1999 ; Hampton, 2001 ). On this point, Foote and Crystal (2007 , p 553) suggested that “the observed difference in accuracy between choice and forced tests is not predicted by differential reinforcement associated with specific stimulus durations.” However, this suggestion does not seem to have been formally evaluated, and doing so is critical for the interpretation of several influential experiments. The third purpose of the present formal analyses is to make this evaluation. We emphasize that all the experiments discussed in this article have strengths, that all of them met admirably the challenge of asking animals a difficult experimental question, and that all of them have combined, in a short time, to produce a sophisticated and intriguing research area. Nonetheless, regarding the research in this area, including our own, it seems constructive to outline residual concerns and evaluate alternative explanatory frameworks in this growing field. There may be practices that cannot be endorsed because they produce data patterns that are too threatened by confounding associative interpretations. But there may also be ways to sharpen the field’s paradigms so that they allow the strongest inference about a metacognitive capacity in nonhuman animals because they are safest from associative interpretations. In fact, this is the fourth purpose and overarching goal of the present article. General Method Our simulation methodology and modeling framework were described previously ( Smith et al., 2003 ). They use standard perceptual and decisional processes that have been incorporated into many articles on animal perception (e.g., Stebbins, 1970 ). They provide a unifying description of performance by supporting cross-task and cross-species comparisons among data patterns. They let us illustrate important paradigms so that their behavioral and performance implications can be evaluated. Our models are grounded in Signal Detection Theory (SDT – MacMillan &amp; Creelman 1991 ). SDT assumes that performance in perceptual tasks is organized along an ordered series (a continuum) of psychological representations of changing impact or increasing strength. In a duration- or density-judgment task, for example, the continuum of subjective impressions would run from clearly short to clearly long or clearly sparse to clearly dense. In typical metacognition tasks, these continua would have a discrimination breakpoint in the middle. One primary discrimination response or the other would be correct for trials below or above this breakpoint. Following SDT, we also assume that the objective stimulus presented on each trial is perceived with some degree of perceptual error. Thus, objective stimuli actually create, from trial to trial, subjective impressions scattered in a Gaussian distribution around the mean value established by the stimulus. An observer’s perceptual error can be summarized by the standard deviation of that normal distribution (i.e., how far are subjective impressions generally scattered from trial to trial around objective stimulus values). We also assume that the observer establishes response regions by placing decision criteria along the continuum of subjective impressions. By the usual metacognitive interpretation of the referent experiments, one would assume that there are upper and lower criteria defining three response regions, the leftmost reserved for one primary discrimination response, the rightmost for the other discrimination response, and the middle region demarcating problematic subjective impressions that might be from either stimulus class and that should receive uncertainty responses. Figure 1 illustrates the formal situation. The Gaussian distributions show the ranges of subjective impressions engendered by four objective stimuli along a perceptual continuum. The outer distributions represent trials farther from the breakpoint of the discrimination that would often be answered correctly. The inner distributions represent difficult stimuli nearer the discrimination’s breakpoint. The overlap between these distributions shows that fairly often opposing trial types create identical psychological impressions. This causes errors and fosters uncertainty in the task—both kinds of trials can feel alike to the perceiver. The Uncertain response region between the two criterion lines would let the observer avoid many of these trials. Figure 1. Open in a new tab A signal detection theory (SDT) portrayal of performance in a discrimination task with an uncertain response sometimes allowed. The horizontal axis indicates the subjective impression of the trial. The range of subjective impressions engendered by four objective trial levels is also shown (normal distributions). The observer would obey the two criterion lines, making one or the other primary discrimination response for impressions below the left criterion or above the right criterion. Subjective impressions in between would be declined. The first two simulations illustrate our modeling framework and show how it recovers two influential results in the comparative metacognition literature. Simulation 1: Illustrating the Short-Long Metacognition Paradigm Method Foote and Crystal’s (2007) Short-Long paradigm was grounded in a duration continuum that runs from 2 s (Short) to 8 s (Long), spanning 71 steps in which each logarithmic step defines a duration that is 2% longer than the last. Foote and Crystal used Levels 1, 11, 21, 31, 41, 51, 61, and 71 along this continuum, with Level 36 the discrimination breakpoint. To illustrate a metacognitive performance in this task, we placed along the 71-step continuum a Short-Uncertainty criterion at Level 23 and an Uncertainty-Long criterion at Level 49. This produced a 26-Step uncertainty region, centered on the breakpoint (36) and adaptive for allowing the simulated observer to avoid the difficult trials near that breakpoint. We gave the simulated observer a perceptual error of 18, close to that observed by Foote and Crystal (2007) . That is, we gave Figure 1 ’s normal distributions a standard deviation of 18. These choices were made pragmatically to provide a typical data pattern and an appropriate target for fitting by alternative formal frameworks. Foote and Crystal (2007) followed the common practice to intermix Forced trials—in which observers must make a primary discrimination response (e.g., Short or Long)—and Chosen trials—in which they can either accept the discrimination trial (responding Short or Long) or decline it. In Simulation 1, we let our simulated observer be guided by the Short-Uncertainty and Uncertainty-Long criteria on Chosen trials, because all three responses were then available. On Forced trials, we made the simulated observer be guided by a Short-Long criterion, because in this case its only response options were Short or Long. This criterion was set at Level 36, the unbiased and optimal strategy. We gave the simulated observer 10,000 Forced and 10,000 Chosen trials at each duration level (1–71). Objective durations were scattered into subjective impressions through the application of Gaussian perceptual error. On Forced trials, the observer responded Short or Long to impressions that were below or above the Short-Long criterion, and guessed for impressions at criterion. On Chosen trials, the observer made Short responses to impressions at or below the Short-Uncertainty criterion, Long responses to impressions at or above the Uncertainty-Long criterion, and Uncertain responses for impressions in between. Results Figure 2 shows the performance of this simulated observer. The open diamonds and open triangles, respectively, show the proportion of correct responses on Chosen and Forced trials. For short- or long-duration trials, respectively, the observer was mostly able to respond Short or Long correctly. The greater difficulty of the middle region of the continuum is reflected in the decreasing performance levels there for both Chosen and Forced trials. The simulated observer responded adaptively to this difficulty by responding uncertain for more trials in this region (filled circles). Finally, the Chosen-Forced performance advantage—a crucial result in several studies—is also expressed by this simulation. Chosen trials were more often answered correctly. The metacognitive interpretation of this result is that the Chosen trials reflect performance on a population of trials that were mostly answered correctly because they were motivated by a positive metacognitive assessment. In short, Simulation 1 captures, using an established formal framework, the components of an influential metacognitive performance that animals have recently shown. It also provides a target phenomenon within the present article. Figure 2. Open in a new tab Temporal-duration discrimination performance by a simulated observer in Simulation 1 that performed as illustrated in Figure 1 . Details of the simulation are described in the text. The horizontal axis indicates the objective duration of the trial (Levels 1–35 Short; Levels 37–71 Long). The open diamonds and open triangles, respectively, show the proportion correct the observer achieved on the trials it chose to complete or was forced to complete. The filled circles show the proportional use of the uncertainty response for different trial levels. As a reliability check, we reran the same configuration of the model (18-23-49-36) for 10,000 Chosen and Forced trials at 71 levels. Across the two runs of the simulation, we compared the 213 corresponding response proportions (i.e., proportions of Uncertain, Chosen correct, and Forced correct trials at 71 levels). We calculated the Sum of the Squared Deviations (SSD) and the Average Absolute Deviation (AAD) between the two data patterns. The SSD was 0.008. The AAD was 0.005, meaning that pairs of observations in the two runs differed by 0.5%. The two performances were essentially identical. Though this is not surprising, this analysis provides a benchmark of reproducibility that will be useful below. Simulation 2: Illustrating the Sparse-Dense Metacognition Paradigm Method The Sparse-Dense paradigm uses a continuum of the pixel density within a box shown on a computer screen. The paradigm can be illustrated using a continuum spanning 41 steps, with Level 21 its breakpoint, and with each logarithmic step defining a density 1.8% greater than the last. To illustrate a metacognitive performance in this task, we placed a Sparse-Uncertainty criterion at Level 16 and an Uncertainty-Dense criterion at Level 26. This produced a 10-Step uncertainty region, centered on the discrimination breakpoint (21) and