--> Action (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy/Winter 2018 Edition) Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Archive Winter 2018 Edition Menu Browse Table of Contents New in this Archive Chronological Archives About Editorial Information About the SEP Editorial Board How to Cite the SEP Special Characters Contact Support SEP Support the SEP PDFs for SEP Friends Make a Donation SEPIA for Libraries Entry Navigation Entry Contents Bibliography Academic Tools Friends PDF Preview Author and Citation Info Back to Top Action First published Mon Mar 18, 2002; substantive revision Wed Apr 4, 2012 If a person's head moves, she may or may not have moved her head, and, if she did move it, she may have actively performed the movement of her head or merely, by doing something else, caused a passive movement. And, if she performed the movement, she might have done so intentionally or not. This short array of contrasts (and others like them) has motivated questions about the nature, variety, and identity of action. Beyond the matter of her moving, when the person moves her head, she may be indicating agreement or shaking an insect off her ear. Should we think of the consequences, conventional or causal, of physical behavior as constituents of an action distinct from but &lsquo;generated by&rsquo; the movement? Or should we think that there is a single action describable in a host of ways? Also, actions, in even the most minimal sense, seem to be essentially &lsquo;active&rsquo;. But how can we explain what this property amounts to and defend our wavering intuitions about which events fall in the category of the &lsquo;active&rsquo; and which do not? Donald Davidson [1980, essay 3] asserted that an action, in some basic sense, is something an agent does that was &lsquo;intentional under some description,&rsquo; and many other philosophers have agreed with him that there is a conceptual tie between genuine action, on the one hand, and intention, on the other. However, it is tricky to explicate the purported tie between the two concepts. First, the concept of &lsquo;intention&rsquo; has various conceptual inflections whose connections to one another are not at all easy to delineate, and there have been many attempts to map the relations between intentions for the future, acting intentionally, and acting with a certain intention. Second, the notion that human behavior is often intentional under one description but not under another is itself hard to pin down. For example, as Davidson pointed out, an agent may intentionally cause himself to trip, and the activity that caused the tripping may have been intentional under that description while, presumably, the foreseen but involuntary tripping behavior that it caused is not supposed to be intentional under any heading. Nevertheless, both the tripping and its active cause are required to make it true that the agent intentionally caused himself to trip. Both occurrences fall equally, in that sense, &lsquo;under&rsquo; the operative description. So further clarification is called for. There has been a notable or notorious debate about whether the agent's reasons in acting are causes of the action &mdash; a longstanding debate about the character of our common sense explanations of actions. Some philosophers have maintained that we explain why an agent acted as he did when we explicate how the agent's normative reasons rendered the action intelligible in his eyes. Others have stressed that the concept of &lsquo;an intention with which a person acted&rsquo; has a teleological dimension that does not, in their view, reduce to the concept of &lsquo;causal guidance by the agent's reasons.&rsquo; But the view that reason explanations are somehow causal explanations remains the dominant position. Finally, recent discussions have revived interest in important questions about the nature of intention and its distinctiveness as a mental state, and about the norms governing rational intending. 1. The Nature of Action and Agency 1.1 Knowledge of one's own actions. 1.2 Governance of one's own actions. 2. Intentional Action and Intention 3. The Explanation of Action 4. Intentions and Rationality Bibliography Academic Tools Other Internet Resources Related Entries 1. The Nature of Action and Agency It has been common to motivate a central question about the nature of action by invoking an intuitive distinction between the things that merely happen to people &mdash; the events they undergo &mdash; and the various things they genuinely do . The latter events, the doings, are the acts or actions of the agent, and the problem about the nature of action is supposed to be: what distinguishes an action from a mere happening or occurrence? For some time now, however, there has been a better appreciation of the vagaries of the verb &lsquo;to do&rsquo; and a livelier sense that the question is not well framed. For instance, a person may cough, sneeze, blink, blush, and thrash about in a seizure, and these are all things the person has, in some minimal sense, &lsquo;done,&rsquo; although in the usual cases, the agent will have been altogether passive throughout these &lsquo;doings.&rsquo; It is natural to protest that this is not the sense of &ldquo;do&rdquo; the canny philosopher of action originally had in mind, but it is also not so easy to say just what sense that is. Moreover, as Harry Frankfurt [1978] has pointed out, the purposeful behavior of animals constitutes a low-level type of &lsquo;active&rsquo; doing. When a spider walks across the table, the spider directly controls the movements of his legs, and they are directed at taking him from one location to another. Those very movements have an aim or purpose for the spider, and hence they are subject to a kind of teleological explanation. Similarly, the idle, unnoticed movements of my fingers may have the goal of releasing the candy wrapper from my grasp. All this behavioral activity is &lsquo;action&rsquo; in some fairly weak sense. Nevertheless, a great deal of human action has a richer psychological structure than this. An agent performs activity that is directed at a goal, and commonly it is a goal the agent has adopted on the basis of an overall practical assessment of his options and opportunities. Moreover, it is immediately available to the agent's awareness both that he is performing the activity in question and that the activity is aimed by him at such-and-such a chosen end. At a still more sophisticated conceptual level, Frankfurt [1988, 1999] has also argued that basic issues concerning freedom of action presuppose and give weight to a concept of &lsquo;acting on a desire with which the agent identifies .&rsquo; Under Frankfurt's influence on this point, a good deal has been written to elucidate the nature of &lsquo;full-blooded&rsquo; human agency, whether the notion is finally delineated either in Frankfurt's way or along different but related lines [see Velleman 2000, essay 6, Bratman 1999, essay 10]. Thus, there are different levels of action to be distinguished, and these include at least the following: unconscious and/or involuntary behavior, purposeful or goal directed activity (of Frankfurt's spider, for instance), intentional action, and the autonomous acts or actions of self-consciously active human agents. Each of the key concepts in these characterizations raises some hard puzzles. 1.1 Knowledge of one's own actions. It is frequently noted that the agent has some sort of immediate awareness of his physical activity and of the goals that the activity is aimed at realizing. In this connection, Elizabeth Anscombe [1963] spoke of &lsquo;knowledge without observation.&rsquo; The agent knows &lsquo;without observation&rsquo; that he is performing certain bodily movements (perhaps under some rough but non-negligible description), and he knows &lsquo;without observation&rsquo; what purpose(s) the behavior is meant to serve [see also Falvey 2000]. Anscombe's discussion of her claim is rich and suggestive, but her conception of &lsquo;knowledge through observation&rsquo; is problematic. Surely, one wants to say, proprioception and kinesthetic sensation play some role in informing the agent of the positions and movements of his body, and it is uncertain why these informational roles should fail to count as modes of inner &lsquo;observation&rsquo; of the agent's own overt physical behavior. What Anscombe explicitly denies is that agents generally know of the positions or movements of their own bodies by means of &lsquo;separably describable sensations&rsquo; that serve as criteria for their judgements about the narrowly physical performance of their bodies. However, when a person sees that there is a goldfinch in front of him, his knowledge is not derived as an inference from the &lsquo;separably describable&rsquo; visual impressions he has in seeing the goldfinch, but this is an instance of knowledge through observation nonetheless. In a related vein, David Velleman [1989] describes knowledge of one&rsquo;s present and incipient actions as &lsquo;spontaneous&rsquo; (knowledge that the agent has achieved without deriving it from evidence adequate to warrant it), and as &lsquo;self-fulfilling&rsquo; (expectations of acting that tend to produce actions of the kind expected). For Velleman, these expectations are themselves intentions, and they are chiefly derived by the agent through practical reasoning about what she is to perform. Thus, Velleman is what Sarah Paul (2009) calls a Strong Cognitivist, i.e., someone who identifies an intention with a certain pertinent belief about what she is doing or about to do. Setiya (2009) holds a similar view. A Weak Cognitivist, in Paul's terminology, is a theorist that holds that intentions to F are partially constituted by but are not identical with relevant beliefs that one will F . For instance, Paul Grice (1971) held that an intention to F consisted in the agent&rsquo;s &lsquo;willing&rsquo; herself to F combined with a belief that she will actually F as a more or less immediate consequence of her having so willed. Because Strong Cognitivists maintain that the intention/beliefs of the agent are predominantly not based either on observation or evidence of any sort, and because they claim in addition that these states are causally reliable in producing actions that validate their contents, such theorists believe that these intentions, when they have been carried out, constitute a mode of &lsquo;practical&rsquo; knowledge that has not been derived from observation. Weak Cognitivists can construct a similar story about how the agent's own actions can, in a plausible sense, be known without relying on observation. However, it is not obvious that an agent&rsquo;s knowledge of her intentional actions is not inferred from immediate knowledge of her own intentions. Consider, to illustrate the line of thought, Grice's theory of intention and belief. As noted above, he held a Weak Cognitivist view according to which an agent wills that he F s and derives from his awareness of willing that he will in fact F (or at least try to F ) precisely because he has willed to do so. However, it seems plausible, as Sarah Paul argues at length in her 2009, that intentions to F , rightly understood, can take the place of the counterpart &lsquo;willings&rsquo; in Grice's account. Thus, an agent, intending to F in the near future, and being immediately aware of so intending, forms inferentially the belief that she will F soon (or at least try to F ) precisely because she has intended to do so. After all, the conditional, If the agent intends to F shortly and does not change her mind, then shortly she will at least try to F . appears to be knowable a priori . The belief that the agent thereby derives is, although it is inferred, not derived from observation. Paul labels this the &ldquo;the inferentialist account,&rdquo; and it is not easily ruled out. [See also Wilson 2000 and Moran 2001.] These puzzles about the nature of an agent's knowledge of her own intentional actions are thus closely intertwined with questions about the nature of intention and about the nature of the explanation of action. In the final section, we address briefly some further key issues that arise in this connection. 1.2 Governance of one's own actions. It is also important to the concept of &lsquo;goal directed action&rsquo; that agents normally implement a kind of direct control or guidance over their own behavior. An agent may guide her paralyzed left arm along a certain path by using her active right arm to shove it through the relevant trajectory. The moving of her right arm, activated as it is by the normal exercise of her system of motor control, is a genuine action, but the movement of her left arm is not. That movement is merely the causal upshot of her guiding action, just as the onset of illumination in the light bulb is the mere effect of her action when she turned on the light. The agent has direct control over the movement of the right arm, but not over the movement of the left. And yet it is hardly clear what &lsquo;direct control of behavior&rsquo; can amount to here. It does not simply mean that behavior A , constituting a successful or attempted F ing, was initiated and causally guided throughout its course by a present-directed intention to be F ing then. Even the externally guided movement of the paralyzed left arm would seem to satisfy a condition of this weak sort. Alfred Mele [1992] has suggested that the intuitive &lsquo;directness&rsquo; of the guidance of action A can partially be captured by stipulating that the action-guiding intention must trigger and sustain A proximally . In other words, it is stipulated that the agent's present-directed intention to be F ing should govern action A , but not by producing some other prior or concurrent action A * that causally controls A in turn. But the proposal is dubious. On certain assumptions, most ordinary physical actions are liable to flunk this strengthened requirement. The normal voluntary movements of an agent's limbs are caused by complicated contractions of suitable muscles, and the muscle contractions, since they are aimed at causing the agent's limbs to move, may themselves count as causally prior human actions. For instance, on Davidson's account of action they will since the agent's muscle contracting is intentional under the description &lsquo;doing something that causes the arm to move&rsquo; [see Davidson 1980, essay 2]. Thus, the overt arm movement, in a normal act of voluntary arm moving, will have been causally guided by a prior action, the muscle contracting, and consequently the causal guidance of the arm's movement will fail to be an instance of &lsquo;proximal&rsquo; causation at all [see Sehon 1998]. As one might imagine, this conclusion depends upon how an act of moving a part of one's body is to be conceived. Some philosophers maintain that the movements of an agent's body are never actions. It is only the agent's direct moving of, say, his leg that constitutes a physical action; the leg movement is merely caused by and/or incorporated as a part of the act of moving [see Hornsby 1980]. This thesis re-opens the possibility that the causal guidance of the moving of the agent's leg by the pertinent intention is proximal after all. The intention proximally governs the moving, if not the movement, where the act of moving is now thought to start at the earliest, inner stage of act initiation. Still, this proposal is also controversial. For instance, J.L. Austin [1962] held that the statement (1) The agent moved his leg is ambiguous between (roughly) (1&prime;) The agent caused his leg to move and the more specific (1&Prime;) The agent performed a movement with his leg. If Austin is right about this, then the nominalization &ldquo;the agent's moving of his leg&rdquo; should be correspondingly ambiguous, with a second reading that denotes a certain leg movement, a movement the agent has performed . Thus, no simple appeal to a putative distinction between &lsquo;movement&rsquo; and &lsquo;moving&rsquo; will easily patch up the conception of &lsquo;direct control of action&rsquo; under present scrutiny. In any event, there is another well-known reason for doubting that the &lsquo;directness&rsquo; of an agent's governance of his own actions involves the condition of causal proximality &mdash; that an action is not to be controlled by still another action of the same agent. Some philosophers believe that the agent's moving his leg is triggered and sustained by the agent's trying to move his leg in just that way, and that the efficacious trying is itself an action [see Hornsby 1980, Ginet 1990, and O'Shaughnessy 1973, 1980]. If, in addition, the agent's act of leg moving is distinct from the trying, then, again, the moving of the leg has not been caused proximally by the intention. The truth or falsity of this third assumption is linked with a wider issue about the individuation of action that has also been the subject of elaborate discussion. Donald Davidson [1980, essay 1], concurring with Anscombe, held that (2) If a person F s by G ing, then her act of F ing = her act of G ing. In Davidson's famous example, someone alerts a burglar by illuminating a room, which he does by turning on a light, which he does in turn by flipping the appropriate switch. According to the Davidson/Anscombe thesis above, the alerting of the burglar = the illuminating of the room = the turning on of the light = the flipping of the switch. And this is so despite the fact that the alerting of the burglar was unintentional while the flipping of the switch, the turning on of the light, and the illuminating of the room were intentional. Suppose now that it is also true that the agent moved his leg by trying to move his leg in just that matter. Combined with the Davidson/Anscombe thesis about act identification, this implies that the agent's act of moving his leg = his act of trying to move that leg. So, perhaps the act of trying to move the leg doesn't cause the act of moving after all, since they are just the same. The questions involved in these debates are potentially quite confusing. First, it is important to distinguish between phrases like (a) the agent's turning on the light and gerundive phrases such as (b) the agent's turning on of the light. Very roughly, the expression (a) operates more like a &lsquo;that&rsquo; clause, viz. (a&prime;) that the agent turned on the light, while the latter phrase appears to be a definite description, i.e., (b&prime;) the turning on of the light [performed] by the agent. What is more, even when this distinction has been drawn, the denotations of the gerundive phrases often remain ambiguous, especially when the verbs whose nominalizations appear in these phrases are causatives. No one denies that there is an internally complex process that is initiated by the agent's switch-flipping hand movement and that is terminated by the light's coming on as a result. This process includes, but is not identical with, the act that initiates it and the event that is its culminating upshot. Nevertheless, in a suitable conversational setting, the phrases (b) and (b&prime;) can be properly used to designate any of the three events: the act that turned on the light, the onset of illumination in the light, and whole process whereby the light has come to be turned on. [For further discussion, see Parsons 1990, Pietrofsky 2000, and Higginbotham 2000]. Now, the Davidson-Anscombe thesis plainly is concerned with the relation between the agent's act of turning on the light, his act of flipping the switch, etc. But which configuration of events, either prior to or contained within the extended causal process of turning on the light, really constitutes the agent's action? Some philosophers have favored the overt arm movement the agent performs, some favor the extended causal process he initiates, and some prefer the relevant event of trying that precedes and &lsquo;generates&rsquo; the rest. It has proved difficult to argue for one choice over another without simply begging the question against competing positions. As noted before, Hornsby and other authors have pointed to the intuitive truth of (3) The agent moved his arm by trying to move his arm, and they appeal to the Davidson-Anscombe thesis to argue that the act of moving the arm = the act of trying to move the arm. On this view, the act of trying &mdash; which is the act of moving &mdash; causes a movement of the arm in much the same way that an act of moving the arm causes the onset of illumination in the light. Both the onset of illumination and the overt arm movement are simply causal consequences of the act itself, the act of trying to move his arm in just this way. Further, in light of the apparent immediacy and strong first person authority of agents' judgements that they have tried to do a certain thing, it appears that acts of trying are intrinsically mental acts. So, a distinctive type of mental act stands as the causal source of the bodily behavior that validates various physical re-descriptions of the act. And yet none of this seems inevitable. It is arguable that (4) The agent tried to turn on the light simply means, as a first approximation at least, that (4&prime;) The agent did something that was directed at turning on the light. Moreover, when (4) or (4&prime;) is true, then the something the agent did that was directed at turning on the light will have been some other causally prior action, the act of flipping the switch, for example. If this is true of trying to perform basic acts (e.g., moving one's own arm) as well as non-basic, instrumental acts, then trying to move one's arm may be nothing more than doing something directed at making one's arm move. In this case, the something which was done may simply consist in the contracting of the agent's muscles. Or, perhaps, if we focus on the classic case of the person whose arm, unknown to her, is paralyzed, then the trying in that case (and perhaps in all) may be nothing more than the activation of certain neural systems in the brain. Of course, most agents are not aware that they are initiating appropriate neural activity, but they are aware of doing something that is meant to make their arms move. And, in point of fact, it may well be that the something of which they are aware as a causing of the arm movement just is the neural activity in the brain. From this perspective, &lsquo;trying to F &rsquo; does not name a natural kind of mental act that ordinarily sets off a train of fitting physical responses. Rather, it gives us a way of describing actions in terms of a goal aimed at in the behavior without committing us as to whether the goal was realized or not. It also carries no commitment, concerning the intrinsic character of the behavior that was aimed at F ing, whether one or several acts were performed in the course of trying, and whether any further bodily effects of the trying were themselves additional physical actions [see Cleveland 1997]. By contrast, it is a familiar doctrine that what the agent does, in the first instance, in order to cause his arm to move is to form a distinctive mental occurrence whose intrinsic psychological nature and content is immediately available to introspection. The agent wills his arm to move or produces a volition that his arm is to move, and it is this mental willing or volition that is aimed at causing his arm to move. Just as an attempt to turn on the light may be constituted by the agent's flipping of the switch, so also, in standard cases, trying to move his arm is constituted by the agent's willing his arm to move. For traditional &lsquo;volitionalism,&rsquo; willings, volitions, basic tryings are, in Brian O'Shaughnessy's apt formulation, &lsquo;primitive elements of animal consciousness.&rsquo; [ 1 ] They are elements of consciousness in which t