Knowing Ourselves Together: The Cultural Origins of Metacognition - PMC Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here's how you know Here's how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Search Log in Dashboard Publications Account settings Log out Search… Search NCBI Primary site navigation Search Logged in as: Dashboard Publications Account settings Log in Search PMC Full-Text Archive Search in PMC Journal List User Guide PERMALINK Copy As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with, the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. Learn more: PMC Disclaimer | PMC Copyright Notice Trends Cogn Sci . 2020 May;24(5):349–362. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2020.02.007 Search in PMC Search in PubMed View in NLM Catalog Add to search Knowing Ourselves Together: The Cultural Origins of Metacognition Cecilia Heyes Cecilia Heyes 1 All Souls College, University of Oxford, High Street, Oxford OX1 4AL, UK 2 Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3UD, UK Find articles by Cecilia Heyes 1, 2, ⁎ , Dan Bang Dan Bang 2 Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3UD, UK 3 Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, University College London, 12 Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, UK Find articles by Dan Bang 2, 3 , Nicholas Shea Nicholas Shea 4 Institute of Philosophy, Senate House, Malet Street, London WC1E 7HU, UK 5 Faculty of Philosophy, University of Oxford, Woodstock Road, Oxford OX2 6GG, UK Find articles by Nicholas Shea 4, 5 , Christopher D Frith Christopher D Frith 3 Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, University College London, 12 Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, UK 4 Institute of Philosophy, Senate House, Malet Street, London WC1E 7HU, UK Find articles by Christopher D Frith 3, 4 , Stephen M Fleming Stephen M Fleming 3 Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, University College London, 12 Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, UK 6 Max Planck University College London Centre for Computational Psychiatry and Ageing Research, University College London, London WC1B 5EH, UK 7 Department of Experimental Psychology, University College London, 26 Bedford Way, London, WC1H 0AP, UK Find articles by Stephen M Fleming 3, 6, 7, ⁎ Author information Copyright and License information 1 All Souls College, University of Oxford, High Street, Oxford OX1 4AL, UK 2 Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3UD, UK 3 Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, University College London, 12 Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, UK 4 Institute of Philosophy, Senate House, Malet Street, London WC1E 7HU, UK 5 Faculty of Philosophy, University of Oxford, Woodstock Road, Oxford OX2 6GG, UK 6 Max Planck University College London Centre for Computational Psychiatry and Ageing Research, University College London, London WC1B 5EH, UK 7 Department of Experimental Psychology, University College London, 26 Bedford Way, London, WC1H 0AP, UK ⁎ Correspondence: cecilia.heyes@all-souls.ox.ac.uk stephen.fleming@ucl.ac.uk © 2020 The Authors This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). PMC Copyright notice PMCID: PMC7903141 PMID: 32298621 Abstract Metacognition – the ability to represent, monitor and control ongoing cognitive processes – helps us perform many tasks, both when acting alone and when working with others. While metacognition is adaptive, and found in other animals, we should not assume that all human forms of metacognition are gene-based adaptations. Instead, some forms may have a social origin, including the discrimination, interpretation, and broadcasting of metacognitive representations. There is evidence that each of these abilities depends on cultural learning and therefore that cultural selection might shape human metacognition. The cultural origins hypothesis is a plausible and testable alternative that directs us towards a substantial new programme of research. Keywords: confidence, cultural evolution, cultural learning, metacognition Highlights Human metacognition involves discrimination, interpretation, and broadcasting of subtle cues indicating the rightness of ongoing thought and behaviour. We propose that human metacognition is made fit for purpose by cultural evolution rather than genetic evolution. In particular, we present evidence that the effective discrimination, interpretation, and broadcasting of metacognitive cues depends on cultural learning. The cultural origins hypothesis advances a programme of research on the development of metacognition, cultural variation, individual differences, and cross-species comparisons. Where Does Metacognition Come From? How do cognitive mechanisms become fit for purpose? They are all complex products of nature and nurture, but who or what designs the features that enable cognitive processes to do their jobs? How come visual systems can see, learning mechanisms can learn, and reasoning processes can reason? In many cases, gene-based selection (see Glossary ) leads the design team. The visual system can see primarily because it has been honed by natural selection over biological generations. Variant systems were genetically inherited, and, through differential reproduction, those that were better at processing visual information proliferated while the others died out. In some cases, intentional design is also involved [ 1 ]. The cognitive mechanisms enabling you to read these words were designed in part by educationalists. The people who teach us to read, and designers of literacy programmes, make new cognitive mechanisms from old parts. With foresight and deliberation, they turn mechanisms that were designed by genetic evolution for small object recognition into a cognitive system for reading [ 2 ]. For some cognitive mechanisms, cultural selection is a third member of the design team, alongside genetic evolution and intentional design. Recent evidence suggests that a range of cognitive mechanisms, including imitation and mindreading (or theory of mind), have been shaped by a cultural selection process analogous to gene-based selection [ 3. , 4. , 5. , 6. , 7. ]. In this cultural evolutionary process, variants arise in individual development, rather than by genetic mutation, and are inherited via social interaction rather than DNA. Good variants are culturally learned (e.g., copied) by more agents, but, unlike intentional design, this need not be because the teachers or the learners understand what makes them good. In this opinion article, we suggest that an important kind of metacognition has been made fit for purpose primarily by the latter two members of the team – intentional design and cultural evolution – rather than genetic selection. Here, we focus on the role of cultural evolution. We survey evidence that explicit metacognition ( Box 1 ) is social in origin, and we outline an empirical programme that would allow the cultural origins hypothesis to be further developed and tested. First, however, we outline the many functions of metacognition in individual and group decision-making. Box 1. Explicit Metacognition. In this article we are concerned with what we call explicit metacognition. A representation is explicit, in our sense, when it is conscious and represented in working memory so that it can be used by processes of cognitive control. Thus, a hallmark of explicit metacognition is that it is sensitive to concurrent processing load. Humans typically communicate explicit metacognitive representations verbally. For example, we can tell others when we are uncertain about what we have seen. However, we can also communicate nonverbally about our explicit metacognitive states; and it is an open question whether language is necessary for an individual to have the capacity for explicit metacognition. Metacognition also operates in implicit processes that are automatic and relatively insensitive to cognitive load. The contrast between explicit and implicit metacognition can be seen in research on error monitoring in skilled typists [ 130 ]. Automatic monitoring processes make skilled typists fractionally slower on the next keystroke after they have made an error. Explicit metacognition, by contrast, allows the typist to report that they have made an error. The factors that affect implicit and explicit metacognition in these scenarios are experimentally dissociable. Metacognition is sometimes assumed to require consciousness, but here we adopt the more liberal definition that does not presuppose that metacognitive processes are conscious. So, a nonconscious representation or evaluation of a cognitive state or process can count as metacognitive. Explicit metacognition does require consciousness but note that our usage does not make explicit synonymous with conscious (which is another common usage). Our use is more restrictive. It excludes automatic metacognitive processes that do not depend on working memory and are insensitive to cognitive load, even if they involve conscious states like feelings of fluency. We can further distinguish two ways in which a metacognitive assessment of a decision can be computed [ 48 ]. First-order confidence is based wholly on the state or states used to take the decision itself. Second-order confidence is computed by a separate system and considers further factors (see Figure 2 in main text). Explicit metacognition is typically the result of a second-order computation. Alt-text: Box 1 Metacognition Has Intrapersonal and Suprapersonal Functions Explicit metacognition uses conscious representations in working memory to monitor or evaluate – and often to control – cognitive states and processes. Explicit metacognition (here metacognition, when not qualified) is sensitive to cognitive load, and is typically slow, deliberate, and verbally reportable [ 8 , 9 ]. It yields feelings of knowing and confidence judgements, allowing us to think and report ‘I’m sure’ and ‘I’m not so sure’ about our perceptions, memories, and decisions. The adoption of frameworks inherited from psychophysics and signal detection theory has made possible the objective measurement of metacognitive ability in laboratory tasks, by assessing the bias and sensitivity of judgments of confidence in relation to task performance [ 10 ]. Metacognitive representations allow information captured by specialised sensorimotor processes to be accessed by other processes in the same agent and by the cognitive systems of other agents – it has both intrapersonal and suprapersonal control functions [ 9 ]. Metacognition contributes to effective intrapersonal decision-making in a range of contexts. For instance, it helps ensure the smooth operation of ongoing thought and behaviour, by helping us recognise our errors [ 11 ], regulate deployment of executive functions [ 12 , 13 ], and detect lapses of attention [ 14 ]. It also enables cognitive offloading – the use of physical actions such as tilting the head, making notes, and finger counting – to alter the information processing requirements of a task to reduce cognitive demand [ 15 , 16 ]. In educational settings, metacognition regulates study time, and thereby enables children and adults to learn more from reading texts [ 17. , 18. , 19. ], which in turn may contribute to the development of general intelligence [ 20 ]. Accordingly, failures of metacognition may lead to maladaptive decision-making: people who are overconfident of their knowledge about information security (a positive metacognitive bias ) are more likely to take risks when using the internet [ 21 ], and people with weaker metacognitive sensitivity are more likely to hold radical beliefs at both ends of the political spectrum [ 22 , 23 ]. Metacognition also plays a central role in suprapersonal decision-making [ 9 , 24 , 25 ]. It not only enables individuals to monitor their own cognitive processes, but it also enables broadcast and sharing of otherwise private mental states with others. Cognitive offloading often involves depositing information with, or soliciting information from, other agents [ 15 , 26 ]. When people are making perceptual decisions together, ‘two heads are better than one’ when each person communicates accurate metacognitive representations about their judgements [ 27. , 28. , 29. , 30. ]. Jurors use witness confidence and other metacognitive representations (e.g., calibration of confidence relative to accuracy) in deciding whether to trust witness testimony [ 31 ]. When coordinating complex actions in team sports, people use metacognitive representations to decide the contribution of each team member [ 32 , 33 ]. The suprapersonal functions of metacognition make it plausible, from an engineering perspective, that metacognition has been shaped by cultural selection. The benefits of enhanced metacognitive skills accrue, not only to the owner of the skills, but also to other members of the social group with whom they make decisions and coordinate action. Consequently, it is in the interests of a person with enhanced metacognitive skills to teach those skills, deliberately or inadvertently, to others in their group, and there is reason to expect more skilled individuals to be more effective teachers – a condition for cultural selection. The Cultural Origins Hypothesis In comparison to this focus on the functions of metacognition, there has been little enquiry about its origins – about the design team that enables metacognition to fulfil its intra- and suprapersonal roles. Researchers tend to assume that genetic evolution has played a major part in making metacognition fit for purpose [ 34 , 35 ] and/or to underline the importance of individual learning [ 36. , 37. , 38. , 39. , 40. ]. We have no doubt that genetic evolution has played a role, and, given the continuing development of metacognition in late childhood and adolescence [ 13 , 20 , 41 , 42 ], that learning is crucial. Indeed, recent studies of human infants suggest that they may have a core, genetically inherited capacity for implicit metacognition [ 26 , 43 ], providing a platform for the slow development of explicit metacognition through learning and experience. However, by contrast with previous work on metacognition, we suggest that a particular kind of learning – cultural learning – is of overriding importance. Learning is cultural when one agent, a receiver, learns from another agent, a sender. In cultural learning, by contrast with other kinds of social learning, what the receiver learns through social interaction with the sender is similar to, and causally dependent on, what the sender knows [ 44 ]. Cultural learning often, but not always, involves teaching. The sender may intend to communicate information to the receiver, or instead involuntarily leak information that is picked up by the receiver. If metacognition is acquired through cultural learning, it may be fit for purpose not because of gene-based selection and intentional design, but also due to cultural selection – a selection process operating on variants transmitted culturally over generations of learners. Here, we survey evidence that metacognition is acquired through cultural learning. A stronger claim would be that metacognition is made fit for purpose by cultural selection; acquired through cultural learning and rendered adaptive by a process of natural selection acting on the culturally learned variants. There is currently less evidence in support of the stronger claim, partly because it has not yet been seriously investigated. However, there is evidence of adaptively relevant variation in metacognitive ability (i.e., in the relevant phenotype) across cultural groups and societies. Given the timescales involved, this is unlikely to be the result of gene-based selection. It is therefore plausible that cultural selection has been at work, selecting the adaptive variants in the metacognitive abilities observed in different cultural groups. Current models of metacognition suggest that a range of first-order monitoring signals need to be re-represented by the metacognitive system in order to become available for the kind of intra- and suprapersonal control functions highlighted above [ 9 , 45 , 46 ] ( Figure 1 ). Many of these first-order signals are encapsulated within the perception-action loop. For instance, if a reaching movement is subtly deviated from its trajectory by an unseen force, the person will correct the deviation without any explicit metacognitive awareness that this correction has been applied [ 47 ]. Metacognitive representations of performance are instead the result of second-order computations with respect to the perception–action cycle. One useful perspective on the computational problem facing metacognition is to treat it as analogous to regular perception albeit with different inputs. Just as perception is engaged with building a model of the environment from limited data, so metacognition needs to build a model of system performance using some form of inference about various cues [ 48 ]. This is consistent with the popular inferential view of how metamemory judgments are formed [ 49 ], and implies that first-order monitoring signals need to be discriminated and interpreted by the metacognitive system. Figure 1. Open in a new tab Various Signals Emerge into Consciousness and Are Available for Broadcast. Unconscious: broken blue lines – monitoring signals encapsulated within the perception–action loop. Conscious: unbroken blue lines – some monitoring signals re-represented as explicit metacognition. Solid black lines – direct experiences re-represented in consciousness. We must learn to distinguish and interpret the various signals that are re-represented in consciousness. Social interaction: we can be helped by others in this endeavour through the ability to broadcast and discuss experiences. In the following, we identify three components that comprise the capacity for metacognition ( Figure 1 ): (i) discrimination – distinguishing metacognitive feelings from one another, and from feelings that do not arise from metacognitive computations; (ii) interpretation – working out the significance of metacognitive representations, for example, whether ease of processing indicates that an object is familiar; and (iii) broadcasting – learning efficient communicative conventions for sharing metacognitive representations with other agents. As we introduce each of these components, and in the section that follows, we survey evidence that their development depends on cultural learning, and we identify opportunities to test this hypothesis further in future research. Discrimination Relevant inputs for metacognition must be distinguished from one another (e.g., stimulus visibility versus decision confidence) and from interoceptive signals, including emotional states (e.g., low confidence versus fear). It would be maladaptive to share within the cognitive system, or broadcast to other agents, feelings that reflect states of the body or the world as if they represent properties of cognitive representations and processes. For instance, fear of a bear should not be mistaken for uncertainty about whether one has seen a bear. However, exactly this kind of crosstalk can be observed in laboratory experiments on metacognition. For example, when people were briefly flashed a face with a disgusted expression, their confidence in an incidental perceptual task was subtly modulated [ 50 ]. In turn, blocking noradrenaline signalling using beta blockers (potentially blunting these arousal signals) leads to an enhancement of metacognitive sensitivity [ 51 ]. Learning to discriminate metacognitive feelings from one another and from other feelings may be analogous to learning to distinguish pairs of visual [ 52 ] or olfactory [ 53 ] stimuli that were, at first, subjectively identical. Other agents who have already learned the discrimination can facilitate the process by creating environments in which different inputs are given different outcomes (e.g., rewards and punishments) or different verbal descriptions [ 54 , 55 ]. For example, sports coaches tell athletes that they are ‘keyed up’ or excited (high arousal) rather than unprepared (low confidence). Some children’s games give different labels to metacognitive and non-metacognitive feelings and further enhance discrimination by arranging for the child to experience no correlation or a negative correlation between them. For example, ‘peek-a-boo’ gives children alternating experiences of certainty and uncertainty – perceptual confidence is high when the adult’s face is visible and low when it is covered. These experiences are given different labels (‘Now you see me’, ‘Now you don’t’) and, crucially, feelings of surprise, resulting from both appearance and disappearance of the face, are not confounded with feelings of certainty. Interpretation There is growing evidence from laboratory studies that agents learn the significance of metacognitive representations. The cultural origins hypothesis draws attention to the fact that these studies provide evidence of cultural learning. Experimenters send information to participant receivers about the significance of metacognitive feelings by structuring participants’ experience (e.g., making true statements difficult to process by reducing text/background contrast), and through verbal instruction (e.g., telling participants that true statements are often difficult to process) [ 56. , 57. , 58. , 59. , 60. ]. Under many conditions, ease of processing a stimulus, an object or a sentence, is interpreted as indicating that the stimulus is familiar, true or attractive [ 61 , 62 ]. It can often be hard to discount misleading influences of fluency on our metacognitive judgments. For instance, in experiments on eyewitness memory [ 63 ], participants were asked to remember a list of faces and afterwards to indicate whether a face was previously on the list or novel, together with their confidence in this decision. Critically, half of the photographs were presented as dimly lit in the test phase, whereas half were presented as brightly lit. Increasing the brightness of the face (and, presumably, processing fluency) at test decreased accuracy in identification, but increased subjects’ confidence in their answers. These results raise the possibility that we genetically inherit a tendency to regard feelings of fluency as positive. However, when participants experience an environment in which novel stimuli are easy to process and familiar stimuli are difficult to process, they begin to interpret ease of processing as a sign that they have not seen a stimulus before [ 64 ]. Similarly, when participants are exposed to false propositions that are easy to process and true propositions that are difficult to process, they begin to interpret ease of processing as a sign of falsity [ 65 ] ( Figure 2 ). Learning through instruction and feedback can even modulate the degree to which different components – response conflict, speed, and repetition – contribute to feelings of fluency [ 57 ]. More generally, instructions (such as ‘When it’s easy, it’s often wrong’) may change interpretation of metacognitive feelings directly, or indirectly by altering priors in subsequent feedback-based reinforcement learning ( Figure 2 ) [ 57 , 66 , 67 ]. As an example of how instruction-based priors can shape metacognitive signals (even in the absence of explicit feedback), people told that they were clever or stupid before a working memory task showed different error-related brain 