--> Self-Consciousness (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy/Spring 2024 Edition) Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Archive Spring 2024 Edition Menu Browse Table of Contents New in this Archive Chronological Archives About Editorial Information About the SEP Editorial Board How to Cite the SEP Special Characters Contact Support SEP Support the SEP PDFs for SEP Friends Make a Donation SEPIA for Libraries Entry Navigation Entry Contents Bibliography Academic Tools Friends PDF Preview Author and Citation Info Back to Top Self-Consciousness First published Thu Jul 13, 2017; substantive revision Tue May 12, 2020 Human beings are conscious not only of the world around them but also of themselves: their activities, their bodies, and their mental lives. They are, that is, self-conscious (or, equivalently, self-aware). Self-consciousness can be understood as an awareness of oneself. But a self-conscious subject is not just aware of something that merely happens to be themselves, as one is if one sees an old photograph without realising that it is of oneself. Rather a self-conscious subject is aware of themselves as themselves ; it is manifest to them that they themselves are the object of awareness. Self-consciousness is a form of consciousness that is paradigmatically expressed in English by the words &ldquo;I&rdquo;, &ldquo;me&rdquo;, and &ldquo;my&rdquo;, terms that each of us uses to refer to ourselves as such . A central topic throughout the history of philosophy&mdash;and increasingly so since the seventeenth century&mdash;the phenomena surrounding self-consciousness prompt a variety of fundamental philosophical and scientific questions, including its relation to consciousness; its semantic and epistemic features; its realisation in both conceptual and non-conceptual representation; and its connection to our conception of an objective world populated with others like ourselves. 1. Self-Consciousness in the History of Philosophy 1.1 Ancient and Medieval Discussions of Self-Consciousness 1.2 Early Modern Discussions of Self-Consciousness 1.3 Kantian and Post-Kantian Discussions of Self-Consciousness 1.4 Early Twentieth Century Discussions of Self-Consciousness 2. Self-Consciousness in Thought 2.1 The Essential Indexical Supplement: Scepticism About Essential Indexicality and Agency 2.2 First-Person Reference Supplement: Evans on First Person Thought 2.3 Immunity to Error Through Misidentification Supplement: The Scope of Immunity to Error Through Misidentification 3. Self-Consciousness in Experience 3.1 Consciousness of the Self 3.2 Pre-Reflective Self-Consciousness 3.3 The Sense of Ownership 4. The Conditions of Self-Consciousness 4.1 Self-Consciousness and Personhood 4.2 Self-Consciousness and Rationality 4.3 Self-Consciousness and Consciousness 4.4 Self-Consciousness and Intersubjectivity 5. Self-Consciousness in Infants and Non-Human Animals 5.1 Mirror Recognition 5.2 Episodic Memory 5.3 Metacognition Bibliography Academic Tools Other Internet Resources Related Entries 1. Self-Consciousness in the History of Philosophy A familiar feature of ancient Greek philosophy and culture is the Delphic maxim &ldquo;Know Thyself&rdquo;. But what is it that one knows if one knows oneself? In Sophocles&rsquo; Oedipus , Oedipus knows a number of things about himself, for example that he was prophesied to kill Laius. But although he knew this about himself, it is only later in the play that he comes to know that it is he himself of whom it is true. That is, he moves from thinking that the son of Laius and Jocasta was prophesied to kill Laius, to thinking that he himself was so prophesied. It is only this latter knowledge that we would call an expression of self-consciousness and that, we may presume, is the object of the Delphic maxim. During the course of the drama Oedipus comes to know himself, with tragic consequences. But just what this self-consciousness amounts to, and how it might be connected to other aspects of the mind, most notably consciousness itself, is less clear. It has, perhaps unsurprisingly, been the topic of considerable discussion since the Greeks. During the early modern period self-consciousness became central to a number of philosophical issues and, with Kant and the post-Kantians, came to be seen as one of the most important topics in epistemology and the philosophy of mind. 1.1 Ancient and Medieval Discussions of Self-Consciousness Although it is occasionally suggested that a concern with self-consciousness is a peculiarly modern phenomenon, originating with Descartes (Brinkmann 2005), it is in fact the topic of lively ancient and medieval debates, many of which prefigure early modern and contemporary concerns (Sorabji 2006). Aristotle, for example, claims that a person must, while perceiving any thing, also perceive their own existence ( De Sensu 7.448a), a claim suggestive of the view that consciousness entails self-consciousness. Furthermore, according to Aristotle, since the intellect takes on the form of that which is thought (Kahn 1992), it &ldquo;is thinkable just as the thought-objects are&rdquo; ( De Anima 3.4.430), an assertion that was interpreted by Aristotle&rsquo;s medieval commentators as the view that self-awareness depends on an awareness of extra-mental things (Cory 2014: ch. 1; Owens 1988). By contrast, the Platonic tradition, principally through the influence of Augustine, writing in the fourth and fifth centuries, is associated with the view that the mind &ldquo;gains the knowledge of [itself] through itself&rdquo; ( On the Trinity 9.3; Matthews 1992; Cary 2000) by being present to itself. Thus, on this view, self-awareness requires no awareness of outer things. In a similar vein, in the eleventh century, Avicenna argues, by way of his Flying Man thought experiment, that a newly created person floating in a void, with all senses disabled, would nevertheless be self-aware. Thus the self that one cognises cannot be a bodily thing of which one is aware through the senses (Kaukua &amp; Kukkonen 2007; Black 2008; Kaukua 2015). On such views, and in contrast to the Aristotelian picture, basic self-awareness is neither sensory in nature nor dependent on the awareness of other things. This latter claim was accepted by Aquinas, writing in the thirteenth century, who can be seen as synthesising aspects of the Platonic and Aristotelian traditions (Cory 2014). For not only does Aquinas claim that there is a form of self-awareness&mdash;awareness that one exists&mdash;for which, &ldquo;the mere presence of the mind suffices&rdquo;, there is another form&mdash;awareness of one&rsquo;s essence&mdash;that, as Aristotle had claimed, is dependent on cognising other things and so for which &ldquo;the mere presence of the mind does not suffice&rdquo; ( Summa 1, 87, 1; Kenny 1993: ch. 10). This ancient and medieval debate concerning whether the mere presence of the mind is sufficient for self-awareness is related to another concerning whether self-awareness is itself sensory in character or, put another way, whether the self is or is not perceptible. Aquinas has sometimes been interpreted as offering a positive answer to this question, sometimes a negative answer (see Pasnau 2002: ch. 11, and Cory 2014: ch. 4, for differing views). These issues were also discussed in various Indian (Hindu, Jain, and Buddhist) debates (Albahari 2006; Siderits, Thompson, &amp; Zahavi 2013; Ganeri 2012a,b), with a variety of perspectives represented. For example, in the writing of the eleventh century Jain writer Prabh&#257;candra, there appears an argument very much like Avicenna&rsquo;s Flying Man argument for the possibility of self-awareness without awareness of the body (Ganeri 2012a: ch. 2), whereas various thinkers of the Advaita Vend&#257;nta school argue that there is no self-awareness without embodiment (Ram-Prasad 2013). There were, therefore, wide-ranging debates in the ancient and medieval period not only about the nature of self-consciousness, but also about its relation to other aspects of the mind, most notably sensory perception and awareness of the body. 1.2 Early Modern Discussions of Self-Consciousness Central to the early modern discussion of self-consciousness are Descartes&rsquo; assertions, in the second of his Meditations , that &ldquo; I am , I exist , is necessarily true whenever it is put forward by me or conceived in my mind&rdquo; (Descartes 1641: 80), and, in both his Discourse and Principles , that &ldquo;I think, therefore I am&rdquo;, or &ldquo; cogito ergo sum &rdquo; (Descartes 1637: 36, and Descartes 1644: 162; see the discussion of Reflection in the entry on seventeenth century theories of consciousness ). The cogito , which was anticipated by Augustine ( On the Trinity 10.10; Pasnau 2002: ch. 11), embodies two elements of self-awareness&mdash;awareness that one is thinking and awareness that one exists&mdash;that play a foundational role in Descartes&rsquo; epistemological project. As such, it is crucial for Descartes that the cogito is something of which we can be absolutely certain. But whilst most commentators are happy to agree that both &ldquo;I am thinking&rdquo; and &ldquo;I exist&rdquo; are indubitable, there is a great deal of debate over the grounds for such certainty and over the form of the cogito itself (Hintikka 1962; Wilson 1978: ch. 2, &sect;2; B. Williams 1978: ch. 3; Markie 1992). Of particular concern is the question whether these two propositions are known by inference or non-inferentially, e.g., by intuition, an issue that echoes the medieval debates concerning whether one can be said to perceive oneself. One philosopher who accepts the former, intuition-based, account is Locke, who claims that we have an intuitive Knowledge of our own Existence , and an internal infallible Perception that we are. In every Act of Sensation, Reasoning, or Thinking, we are conscious to ourselves of our own Being. (1700: IV.ix.3) A similar claim can be found in Berkeley&rsquo;s Three Dialogues (1713: 231&ndash;234; Stoneham 2002: &sect;6.4). Further, Locke makes self-consciousness partly definitive of the very concept of a person, a person being &ldquo;a thinking intelligent Being, that has reason and reflection, and can consider it self as it self, the same thinking thing in different times and places&rdquo; (1700: II. xxvii.9; Ayers 1991: vol.II, ch.23; Thiel 2011: ch. 4), and self-consciousness also plays an important role in his theory of personal identity (see &sect;4.1 ). If Descartes, Locke, and Berkeley can be interpreted as accepting the view that there is an inner perception of the self, on this question Hume stands in stark contrast notoriously writing that whilst there are some philosophers, who imagine we are every moment intimately conscious of what we call our self [&hellip;] For my part when I enter most intimately into what I call myself , I always stumble on some particular perception or other, of heat or cold, light or shade, love or hatred, pain or pleasure. I never can catch myself at any time without a perception, and never can observe anything but the perception. (Hume 1739&ndash;40: bk.1, ch.4, &sect;6; Pitson 2002: ch. 1; Thiel 2011: ch. 12; cf. Lichtenberg&rsquo;s famous remark that one should not say &ldquo;I think&rdquo; but rather, &ldquo;it thinks&rdquo;, discussed in Z&ouml;ller 1992 and Burge 1998) Hume&rsquo;s view that there is no impression, or perception, of oneself is crucial to his case for the understanding of our idea of ourselves as nothing more than a &ldquo;heap or collection of different perceptions&rdquo; (1739&ndash;40: bk.1, ch.4, &sect;6; Penelhum 2000; G. Strawson 2011a), since lacking an impression of the owner of these perceptions we must, in accordance with his empiricist account of concept acquisition, lack an idea of such. It is clear, then, that in the early modern period issues of self-consciousness play an important role in a variety of philosophical questions regarding persons and their minds. 1.3 Kantian and Post-Kantian Discussions of Self-Consciousness Hume&rsquo;s denial that there is an inner perception of the self as the owner of experience is one that is echoed in Kant&rsquo;s discussion in both the Transcendental Deduction and the Paralogisms, where he writes that there is no intuition of the self &ldquo;through which it is given as object&rdquo; (Kant 1781/1787: B408; Brook 1994; Ameriks 1982 [2000]). Kant&rsquo;s account of self-consciousness and its significance is complex, a central element of the Transcendental Deduction being the claim that a form of self-awareness&mdash;transcendental apperception&mdash;is required to account for the unity of conscious experience over time. In Kant&rsquo;s words, &ldquo;the &lsquo;I think&rsquo; must be able to accompany all my representations&rdquo; (Kant 1781/1787: B132; Keller 1998; Kitcher 2011; see the entry on Kant&rsquo;s view of the mind and consciousness of self ). Thus, while Kant denies that there is an inner awareness of the self as an object that owns its experiences, we must nevertheless be aware of those experiences as things that are, both individually and collectively, our own. The representation of the self in this &ldquo;I think&rdquo; is then, according to Kant, purely formal, exhausted by its function in unifying experience. The Kantian account of self-awareness and its relation to the capacity for objective thought set the agenda for a great deal of post-Kantian philosophy. On the nature of self-awareness, for example, in an unpublished manuscript Schopenhauer concurs with Kant, asserting that, &ldquo;that the subject should become an object for itself is the most monstrous contradiction ever thought of&rdquo; (quoted in Janaway 1989: 120). Further, a philosophical tradition stemming from Kant&rsquo;s work has tried to identify the necessary conditions of the possibility of self-consciousness, with P.F. Strawson (1959, 1966), Evans (1980, 1982), and Cassam (1997), for example, exploring the relation between the capacity for self-conscious thought and the possession of a conception of oneself as an embodied agent located within an objective world (see &sect;4.3 ). Another, related tradition has argued that an awareness of subjects other than oneself is a necessary condition of self-consciousness (see &sect;4.4 ). Historical variations on such a view can be found in Fichte (1794&ndash;1795; Wood 2006), Hegel (1807; Pippin 2010), and, from a somewhat different perspective, Mead (1934; Aboulafia 1986). Fichte offers the most influential account of self-consciousness in the post-Kantian tradition. On the reading of the &ldquo;Heidelberg School&rdquo;, Fichte claims that previous accounts of self-consciousness given by Descartes, Locke, and even Kant are &ldquo;reflective&rdquo;, regarding the self as taking itself not as subject but as object (Henrich 1967; Tugendhat 1979: ch. 3; Frank 2004; Zahavi 2007). But this reflective form of self-awareness, Fichte argues, presupposes a more primitive form since it is necessary for the reflecting self to be aware that the reflected self is in fact itself . Consequently, according to Fichte, we must possess an immediate acquaintance with ourselves, &ldquo;the self exists and posits its own existence by virtue of merely existing&rdquo; (Fichte 1794&ndash;1795: 97). Once more, this debate echoes ancient discussions concerning the nature and role of self-consciousness. 1.4 Early Twentieth Century Discussions of Self-Consciousness In the early twentieth century, Frege suggests a form of self-acquaintance, claiming that &ldquo;everyone is presented to himself in a special and primitive way&rdquo; (Frege 1918&ndash;1919: 333). In a similar vein, in early work Russell (1910) favours the idea that we are acquainted with ourselves, but by the 1920s (1921: 141) he seems to endorse a view more in line with Hume&rsquo;s sceptical account. The same can be said of the Wittgenstein of the Tractatus , who famously likens the self to the eye which sees but does not see itself (Wittgenstein 1921: 5.6&ndash;5.641; O&rsquo;Brien 1996; Sullivan 1996). Husserl&rsquo;s philosophical development seems to have taken the opposite trajectory to that of Russell, with his (1900/1901, Investigation V, &sect;8) denial of the inner awareness of a &ldquo;pure ego&rdquo; being subsequently revised into something resembling Kantian transcendental apperception (Husserl 1913: &sect;57; Carr 1999: ch. 3; Zahavi 2005: ch. 2). Continuing with the phenomenological tradition, Sartre (1937; Priest 2000) takes Husserl&rsquo;s later view to task, arguing against the view that we are continually aware of a transcendent ego, yet in favour of the picture of consciousness as involving a &ldquo;pre-reflective&rdquo; awareness of itself reminiscent of the Heidelberg School view (Wider 1997: ch. 3; Miguens, Preyer, &amp; Morando 2016). Questions about the nature of self-consciousness and, in particular, over whether there is an immediate, or intuitive, consciousness of the self, were as lively as ever well into the twentieth century. 2. Self-Consciousness in Thought One natural way to think of self-consciousness is in terms of a subject&rsquo;s capacity to entertain conscious thought about herself. Self-conscious thoughts are thoughts about oneself. But it is commonly pointed out that thinking about what merely happens to be oneself is insufficient for self-consciousness, rather one must think of oneself as oneself . If one is capable of self-conscious thought, that is, one must be able to think in such a way that it is manifest to one that it is oneself about whom one is thinking. It is widely recognised that the paradigmatic linguistic expression of self-consciousness in English is the first-person pronoun &ldquo;I&rdquo;; a term with which one might be said to refer to oneself as oneself (Sainsbury 2011). Plausibly, every utterance of a sentence containing &ldquo;I&rdquo; is expressive of a self-conscious &ldquo;I-thought&rdquo;, that is a thought containing the first-person concept. Thus, discussions of self-consciousness are often closely associated with accounts of the semantics of the indexical term &ldquo;I&rdquo; and the nature of its counterpart first-person concept (e.g., Anscombe 1975; Perry 1979; Nozick 1981: ch. 1, &sect;2; Evans 1982: ch. 7; Mellor 1989; O&rsquo;Brien 1995a; Casta&ntilde;eda 1999; de Gaynesford 2006; Recanati 2007; R&ouml;dl 2007: ch. 1; Berm&uacute;dez 2016). As Casta&ntilde;eda (1966; cf. Anscombe 1975) points out, there is an ambiguity in certain ascriptions of belief containing &ldquo;he&rdquo; or &ldquo;she&rdquo;. I may say &ldquo;Jane believes that she is F &rdquo; without implying that Jane realises that it is herself that she believes to be F . That is, there is a reading of &ldquo;Jane believes that she is F &rdquo; that does not imply self-consciousness on Jane&rsquo;s part. But, in some cases, we do intend to attribute self-consciousness with that same form of words. To resolve this ambiguity, Casta&ntilde;eda introduces &ldquo;she*&rdquo; for self-conscious attributions. I will use the more natural indirect reflexive &ldquo;she herself&rdquo;. Thus, &ldquo;Jane believes that she is F &rdquo; does not imply that Jane self-consciously believes that she is F , whilst &ldquo;Jane believes that she herself is F &rdquo; does. Before the dreadful revelation, Oedipus believed that he was prophesied to kill his father, but did not believe that he himself was so prophesied. 2.1 The Essential Indexical First-personal language and thought is commonly taken to be sui generis , irreducible to language or thought not containing the first-person pronoun or corresponding concept (Casta&ntilde;eda 1966, 1967; Perry 1977, 1979, 2001). Arguments for this view have typically appealed to the essential role seemingly played by the first-person in explanations of action. This point is supported by a number of well-known examples. Consider Perry&rsquo;s case of the messy shopper, I once followed a trail of sugar on a supermarket floor, pushing my cart down the aisle on one side of a tall counter and back the aisle on the other, seeking the shopper with the torn sack to tell him he was making a mess. With each trip around the counter, the trail became thicker. But I seemed unable to catch up. Finally it dawned on me. I was the shopper I was trying to catch. (Perry 1979: 33) As Perry points out, he knew all along that the shopper with the torn sack was making a mess. He may also have believed that the oldest philosopher in the shop (in fact himself) was making a mess, yet failed to check his own cart since he falsely believed that Quine was at the Deli Counter. Indeed, it seems that for any non-indexical term a that denotes Perry, it is possible for Perry to fail to believe anything naturally expressed by the sentence &ldquo;I am a &rdquo;. If so, it is possible for Perry to rationally believe that a is making a mess without believing anything that he would express as &ldquo;I am making a mess&rdquo;. It was only when Perry came to believe that he himself was making a mess that he stopped the chase. Indeed, it would seem that only the first-personal content can provide an adequate explanation of Perry&rsquo;s behaviour when he stops. If Perry had come to believe that John Perry is making a mess then, unless he also believed that he himself was John Perry, he would not have stopped. The first-personal content is &ldquo;self-locating&rdquo;, thereby enabling action, whereas the non-first-personal content is not. To use Kaplan&rsquo;s (1977) example, if I believe that my pants are on fire, pure self-interest will surely motivate me do something about it. If, however, I believe that Smith&rsquo;s pants are on fire, pure self-interest will only so motivate me if I also believe that I am Smith. On this widely accepted picture, then, first-personal thought and language is irreducible to non-first-personal thought and language, and is essential to the explanation of action (Kaplan 1977: 533; D. Lewis 1979; McGinn 1983: ch. 6; Recanati 2007: ch. 34; Musholt 2015: ch. 1; Prosser 2015; Garc&iacute;a-Carpintero &amp; Torre 2016). Importantly, on Perry&rsquo;s view, what is irreducible is the first-personal way of thinking about ourselves, not the facts or states of affairs that make such thoughts true. So, whilst my belief &ldquo;I am F &rdquo; is not equivalent to any non-first-personal belief, it is true if and only if Smith is F , this being the same fact that makes true the non-first-personal &ldquo;Smith is F &rdquo;. Thus, whilst first-person representations are special, a special class of first-person facts are nowhere to be found (for views that do accept the existence of first-personal facts, see McGinn 1983; Baker 2013; also see Nagel 1986). Perry (1977, 1979) argues that terms such as &ldquo;I&rdquo; which are, as he puts it, &ldquo;essentially indexical&rdquo;, pose a problem for the traditional Fregean view of belief as a two-place relation between a subject and a proposition (cf. Spencer 2007). Fregean senses are, according to Perry, descriptive and as Perry has argued no description is equivalent to an essential indexical. Consequently, no Fregean proposition can be the thing believed when one believes first-personally. Essential indexicality, if somehow forced into the Fregean mould, means that we must implausibly accept that there are incommunicable senses that only the speaker (or thinker) is in a position to grasp (see Garc&iacute;a-Carpintero &amp; Torre 2016); cf.Evans 1981; Longworth 2013). D. Lewis goes further than this, arguing, partly on the basis of his much discussed Two Gods example (1979), in which each God knows all the propositions true at their world yet fails to know which of the two Gods he himself is, that the objects of belief are not propositions at all but rather properties (or centred worlds). That is, since they already know all the true proposition