--> Memory (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy) Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Menu Browse Table of Contents What's New Random Entry Chronological Archives About Editorial Information About the SEP Editorial Board How to Cite the SEP Special Characters Advanced Tools Contact Support SEP Support the SEP PDFs for SEP Friends Make a Donation SEPIA for Libraries Entry Navigation Entry Contents Bibliography Academic Tools Friends PDF Preview Author and Citation Info Back to Top Memory First published Mon Apr 24, 2017 Memory plays important roles in many areas of philosophy. It is vital to our knowledge of the world in general and of the personal past in particular. It underwrites our identities as individuals and our ties to other people. Philosophical interest in memory thus dates back to antiquity and has remained prominent throughout the history of philosophy (Aho 2014; Bloch 2014; Burnham 1888; Herrmann &amp; Chaffinn 1988; Nikulin 2015). More recently, memory has come to be recognized as a topic of major philosophical importance in its own right, with the emergence of the philosophy of memory as a distinct field of research (Bernecker &amp; Michaelian 2017). Much of the impetus for the emergence of the field was due to a trend, beginning in the late 1990s, towards increased interdisciplinarity among philosophers working on memory (Hoerl &amp; McCormack 2001; Sutton 1998), a trend which reinvigorated and transformed older philosophical debates by bringing them into contact with empirical and theoretical developments in psychology and the sciences of memory more broadly. To cite just two examples among the many discussed below, empirical research on the constructive character of remembering has intensified philosophical debates over the viability of the influential causal theory of memory (Robins 2016b) and the associated concept of memory traces (De Brigard 2014b), while theoretical frameworks which situate remembering as a form of imaginative mental time travel have lent new urgency to longstanding debates over the relationship between memory and imagination (Debus 2014; Perrin &amp; Michaelian 2017). The interdisciplinary character of the field notwithstanding, the concerns of philosophers of memory remain distinct from those of memory researchers in other disciplines, and, while this entry discusses the latter where they are of direct philosophical relevance, its focus is squarely on the former. Given the roles played by memory in other areas, the philosophy of memory inevitably overlaps with many other fields of research. Three core areas of activity can nevertheless be discerned, with most researchers approaching memory from the perspectives of philosophy of mind, epistemology, or ethics. The bulk of this entry&mdash;sections 2&ndash;8&mdash;focuses on research on memory from the perspective of philosophy of mind, often referred to as the metaphysics of memory (Bernecker 2008). There is a separate entry on the epistemology of memory , so this area is discussed only briefly here, in section 9. Key issues in the ethics of memory are reviewed in section 10. 1. The Metaphysics of Memory: An Overview 2. Kinds of Memory 2.1 The standard taxonomy 2.1.1 Declarative memory 2.1.2 Nondeclarative memory 2.2 Alternative taxonomies 2.3 Other kinds of memory 2.3.1 Working memory 2.3.2 Prospective memory 2.3.3 Autobiographical memory 2.4 Natural kinds in memory research 3. Episodicity 3.1 First-order content 3.2 Second-order content 3.3 Phenomenology 3.4 Functional perspectives on episodicity 4. Mnemicity 4.1 Remembering and imagining 4.1.1 Unsuccessful remembering 4.1.2 Mere imagining 4.2 Theories of remembering 4.2.1 The empiricist theory 4.2.2 The epistemic theory 4.2.3 The causal theory 4.2.4 The simulation theory 5. Representation 5.1 The objects of memory 5.1.1 Direct realism 5.1.2 Indirect realism 5.1.3 Compromise and hybrid views 5.2 Memory traces 5.2.1 The existence of traces 5.2.2 The role of traces 6. Accuracy 6.1 Truth and authenticity 6.2 Factivity 7. The Self 7.1 Personal identity 7.2 Autobiographical memory 7.2.1 Rilkean memory 7.2.2 Memory and emotion 8. Beyond Individual Memory 8.1 External memory 8.1.1 The concept of external memory 8.1.2 Cognitive consequences of new forms of external memory 8.2 Collective memory 8.2.1 Memory in small-scale groups 8.2.2 Memory in large-scale groups 9. The Epistemology of Memory 10. The Ethics of Memory 10.1 Memory and moral responsibility 10.2 The duty to remember 10.3 The right to be forgotten 10.4 The ethics of external memory 10.5 The ethics of memory modification and enhancement Bibliography Academic Tools Other Internet Resources Related Entries 1. The Metaphysics of Memory: An Overview More than any other area, the metaphysics of memory reflects the trend towards interdisciplinarity noted above, and work in this area sometimes shades into philosophy of psychology (Rowlands 2009) and philosophy of neuroscience (Bickle 2011). Relevant work in the philosophy of psychology is discussed here as appropriate; for more specialized work in the philosophy of neuroscience, see the entry on that topic. The central aim of mainstream research on the metaphysics of memory is to develop a theory of remembering : a general but informative account of what it is for someone to remember something. As we will see, however, there are multiple kinds of memory. It is unclear whether it is feasible to develop a theory of remembering that applies to all of these, and ultimately it may prove necessary to develop multiple theories of remembering, corresponding to the multiple kinds of memory. (Something similar may go for the epistemology of memory [Teroni 2014].) The particular kind of memory on which most recent work has focused has gone by a number of names, but, adopting Tulving&rsquo;s (1972, 1985a) psychological terminology, philosophers increasingly refer to it as &ldquo;episodic&rdquo; (e.g., Hoerl 2007; Dokic 2014; Hopkins 2014; Perrin &amp; Rousset 2014; Soteriou 2008). The terminology may be new, but the focus is not (Brewer 1996). Episodic memory is, roughly, memory for the events of the personal past, and, starting at least with Aristotle (Sorabji 2006) and continuing with early modern philosophers including Locke (1998), Hume ([1739] 2011), and Reid ([1785] 2002), philosophers have singled episodic memory out for special attention on the ground that it provides the rememberer with a unique form of access to past events. For some, indeed, only episodic memory truly merits the name &ldquo;memory&rdquo; (Klein 2015; B. Russell 1921). Reflecting this focus, this entry will be concerned primarily with theories of episodic remembering: accounts of what it is for someone to remember an event from his personal past. Due, perhaps, to their focus on episodic memory, philosophers have generally approached memory as a capacity exercised by single individuals. But recent work in a variety of disciplines has begun to challenge the individualistic approach, and the metaphysics of memory has come to include issues arising from the tradition of research on collective memory in the human and social sciences which traces back to Halbwachs ([1925] 1994; cf. Barash 2016; Michaelian &amp; Sutton forthcoming) and which has recently given birth to the multidisciplinary field of memory studies (Roediger &amp; Wertsch 2008; Segesten &amp; W&uuml;stenberg forthcoming). It has also come to include issues arising from the more recent tradition of research on external memory in cognitive science which views remembering through the lens of distributed (Hutchins 1995) or extended (Clark &amp; Chalmers 1998) theories of cognition. While the entry is concerned primarily with individual memory, these more recent issues will be discussed as well. 2. Kinds of Memory Before turning to theories of episodic remembering, it will be helpful to situate episodic memory with respect to other kinds of memory. In its broadest sense, &ldquo;memory&rdquo; refers to the varied outcomes of the diverse forms of learning of which humans and other agents are capable. Any modification of an agent&rsquo;s behavioural tendencies as a result of its experience thus potentially counts as memory, making the category of memory very broad indeed. Despite the breadth of the category, however, there is an approximate consensus on a taxonomy of kinds of human memory. 2.1 The standard taxonomy Philosophers generally distinguish among three main kinds of memory. In early treatments, Bergson ([1896] 1911) and Russell (1921), for example, distinguished between habit memory and recollective memory, while Broad (1925) and Furlong (1951) further distinguished between recollective memory and propositional memory (cf. Ayer (1956; D. Locke 1971)). These distinctions align reasonably well with those drawn by a taxonomy which, originating in psychology, has increasingly become standard in more recent philosophy. 2.1.1 Declarative memory The taxonomy in question, developed in detail by Squire (2009), divides the overarching category of memory into declarative and nondeclarative memory. Declarative memory, in turn, is divided into episodic memory, corresponding roughly to recollective memory, and semantic memory, corresponding roughly to propositional memory. A first pass at distinguishing episodic from semantic memory can be made by observing that the former is concerned with the events of one&rsquo;s personal past in particular (e.g., I remember speaking at a conference in Budapest), while the later is concerned with the world in general (I remember that Budapest is the capital of Hungary). It is crucial to note, however, that semantic memory is also sometimes concerned with past events. One can have memories that concern events that one did not oneself experience (I remember that my colleague spoke at a workshop in Rome, though I did not hear him speak); when one does, one remembers semantically, not episodically. Similarly, one can have memories that concern events that one did experience but that are of the same kind as memories for events that one did not experience (I remember that I visited the CN Tower when I was a child, but only because my parents later related the story to me); when one does, one likewise remembers semantically, not episodically. Thus the first-pass distinction between episodic and semantic memory does not get us very far. Drawing a more adequate distinction&mdash;providing a criterion of episodicity &mdash;is a core problem for the theories of episodic remembering discussed below. 2.1.2 Nondeclarative memory Nondeclarative memory is usually defined in negative terms: a form of memory is declarative if it involves the encoding, storage, and retrieval of content that the subject can, at least in principle, bring to consciousness; it is nondeclarative if it does not (Squire 2009). Beyond this negative feature, the various kinds of nondeclarative memory may not have much in common with each other. For example, nondeclarative memory includes priming, which occurs when a subject&rsquo;s response to a given stimulus is affected by his previous exposure to related stimuli (e.g., I recognize the word &ldquo;Toronto&rdquo; more quickly after seeing &ldquo;CN Tower&rdquo; than after seeing &ldquo;Colosseum&rdquo;). It also includes procedural memory, corresponding roughly to habit memory, the kind of memory at work when a subject manifests his ability to perform a skilled action (I remember how to ride a bicycle). There is relatively little philosophical research on procedural memory, and this kind of memory will not be discussed in any detail here. This should not, however, be taken to imply that it is not of major philosophical interest. In epistemological terms, while declarative memory maps onto the category of knowledge that, procedural memory maps onto the category of knowledge how : one may know or remember how to do something without consciously entertaining any relevant content and without being able, even in principle, to consciously entertain any such content. Future research on procedural memory might therefore build on classic (Ryle [1949] 2009) and contemporary (Stanley 2011) work on the relationship between knowledge that and knowledge how. Such research might also build on recent work on embodied (Myin &amp; Zahidi 2015; Sutton 2007; Sutton &amp; Williamson 2014) and enactive cognition (Hutto special-character:amp] Myin 2017; Loader 2013). While enactivist approaches will not be discussed any further here, it should be noted there is potential for convergence between these approaches and older Wittgensteinian approaches to memory. Wittgenstein (1980) suggested&mdash;in opposition to trace-based accounts&mdash;that remembering can, under certain circumstances, amount to doing or saying something, rather than retrieving stored content (Moyal-Sharrock 2009; O&rsquo;Loughlin forthcoming). This resonates with the enactivist insistence on the centrality of action to cognition, but connectionist readings of Wittgenstein on memory (Stern 1991) have also been proposed, and it remains to be seen whether supplementing enactivist approaches with Wittgenstein will shed any additional light on the nature of remembering (Sutton 2015). 2.2 Alternative taxonomies Squire&rsquo;s taxonomy has been extremely influential, but alternative taxonomies have been proposed in both psychology and philosophy. In psychology, Atkinson and Shiffrin (1968) proposed a multi-store model in which kinds of memory are distinguished in terms of their temporal duration. Ultra short term memory refers to the persistence of modality-specific sensory information for periods of less than one second. Short term memory refers to the persistence of information for up to thirty seconds; short term memory, which receives information from ultra short term memory, is to some extent under conscious control but is characterized by a limited capacity. Long term memory refers to the storage of information over indefinitely long periods of time; long term memory receives information from short term memory and is characterized by an effectively unlimited capacity. Though this taxonomy does not distinguish among importantly different kinds of long term memory&mdash;in particular, it does not distinguish between episodic and semantic memory&mdash;it has been applied productively in psychological research. With rare exceptions (Werning &amp; Cheng 2017), however, it has not informed philosophical discussions. In philosophy, Bernecker (2010) has proposed a purely grammatical approach, arguing that the kinds of memory are given by the kinds of objects that the verb &ldquo;to remember&rdquo; can take. He thus distinguishes among memory for objects, memory for properties, memory for events, and memory for propositions or facts. While a grammatical approach will strike many in philosophy as natural, this particular taxonomy has so far not been taken up very widely. This may be due in part to the fact that, because the basis for the taxonomy is purely linguistic, it has difficulty distinguishing between episodic memory as such, which is arguably characterized by a particular phenomenology, and mere event memory, which lacks this phenomenology (Schechtman 2011). It may also be due in part to the fact that, because it cuts across the categories employed by the standard taxonomy, it is difficult to apply Bernecker&rsquo;s taxonomy to studies that rely on the latter. 2.3 Other kinds of memory Regardless of its merits, the standard taxonomy omits certain kinds of memory that are bound to figure in any full-fledged theory of remembering. 2.3.1 Working memory Working memory, corresponding roughly to Atkinson and Shiffrin&rsquo;s short term memory, refers to a capacity to actively manipulate a limited number of items in a conscious workspace (Baddeley 2007). There is some philosophical research on working memory (Block 2007; Carruthers 2015; Feest 2011), but the topic has so far been largely unexplored in mainstream philosophy of memory, and it will therefore not be discussed any further in this entry. 2.3.2 Prospective memory Prospective memory refers to the ability to remember to perform a planned action, or to execute an intention. Failures in prospective memory are of considerable everyday significance and often cause some personal concern. Experimental and naturalistic work on prospective memory now flourishes in psychology (McDaniel &amp; Einstein 2007), and there is considerable discussion about how it relates to other forms of memory and to other cognitive processes. Prospective memory has not yet been addressed much in philosophy, but this is likely to change given its relevance to understanding links between intention and action and to other forms of future-oriented thought. 2.3.3 Autobiographical memory Autobiographical memory refers to one&rsquo;s knowledge not only of specific past episodes but also of whole life periods, as well as the overall course of one&rsquo;s life (Berntsen &amp; Rubin 2012). There is a good deal of philosophical research on autobiographical memory, often drawing on accounts of narrativity. The relationship between autobiographical memory and other kinds of memory is described in different ways by different authors, but in most cases autobiographical memory is treated as a complex capacity that emerges through the interaction of more basic kinds of memory. It is thus unlikely to be a kind of memory on a par with those acknowledged by the standard taxonomy, which correspond to specific brain systems. Existing accounts of autobiographical memory are discussed in section 7 below. 2.4 Natural kinds in memory research Psychologists have studied hundreds of different kinds of memory in addition to those described above. Many of these are defined in terms of specific laboratory tasks and are unlikely to qualify as natural kinds (Tulving 2007), kinds that carve nature&mdash;in this case, the mind&mdash;at its joints. But even if only the kinds acknowledged by the standard taxonomy are considered, it is not obvious whether any particular kind of memory, never mind memory as a whole, is a natural kind. The obvious starting point here is the view that memory is indeed a natural kind. Michaelian (2011b) has, however, suggested that memory is not a natural kind, arguing that, because only declarative memory involves the encoding, storage, and retrieval of content, declarative and nondeclarative memory are sharply distinct from each other. This is consistent with the view that declarative memory is a natural kind, but Klein (2015) has rejected even the latter view, claiming that, because episodic memory necessarily involves a particular phenomenology, episodic memory and semantic memory are sharply distinct. In response, Michaelian (2015) has appealed to cases in which subjects appear to have intact episodic memory despite having impaired episodic phenomenology (Klein &amp; Nichols 2012) to argue that the phenomenology in question is not, strictly speaking, a necessary feature of episodic memory. If this suggestion is right, then declarative memory may after all be natural kind. But even if declarative memory turns out not to be a natural kind, episodic memory might still be a natural kind. Cheng and Werning (2016), for example, have argued on the basis of their &ldquo;sequence analysis&rdquo; of remembering&mdash;a variant of the causal theory of memory introduced in section 4 below&mdash;that episodic memory is indeed a natural kind. While there is some work on the question of the natural kindhood of episodic memory, the question of the natural kindhood of kinds of memory other than episodic memory remains almost entirely unexplored. Future work here might both draw on and contribute to resolving the debate between systems and process views of memory (Bechtel 2001; Foster &amp; Jelicic 1999; Schacter &amp; Tulving 1994). According to systems views, memory consists of multiple independent systems which interact in various ways. According to process views, in contrast, memory is a unitary capacity which is employed in different ways in response to different demands. The once-lively debate between partisans of systems views and partisans of process views has now largely died down. It has not, however, been clearly resolved in favour of either camp, and progress towards resolving it might be made by bringing the available evidence into contact with detailed theories of natural kinds . 3. Episodicity As noted above, the kind of memory on which most recent work has focussed is episodic memory. Episodic memory is, roughly, memory for the events of the personal past, but not just any way of thinking about an event from the personal past amounts to episodically remembering it. On the one hand, it is possible, as noted above, for a subject to remember an event not only episodically but also semantically. Thus one core problem for a theory of episodic remembering is to distinguish between episodic memory and semantic memory, that is, to provide a criterion for the episodicity of episodic memory. The present section discusses attempts to solve this problem, which has received a great deal of attention in recent years. On the other hand, it is possible not only to remember an event but also to imagine it. Thus another core problem for a theory of episodic remembering is to distinguish between episodic memory and episodic imagination, that is, to provide a criterion for the mnemicity of episodic memory. Section 4 discusses attempts to solve this problem, which has historically received more attention. 3.1 First-order content In Tulving&rsquo;s early work (Tulving 1972), episodic memory was understood as what-where-when memory&mdash;in other words, as a system dedicated to storing and retrieving information about particular past events. Episodic memory was thus distinguished from semantic memory in terms of the kind of first-order content with which it is concerned. This first-order content-based approach to episodicity is appealingly straightforward, but it fails to acknowledge that semantic memory can also provide information about particular past events. It fails, moreover, to capture what has seemed to many to be the most distinctive feature of episodic memory, namely, its characteristic phenomenology. In light of these problems, many researchers have abandoned first-order content-based approaches in favour of the second-order content-based and phenomenological approaches discussed below. Some researchers, however, particularly those interested in animal memory, continue to employ first-order content-based approaches. The second-order content-based approach, as we will see, imposes significant conceptual demands on rememberers, demands which animals are unlikely to meet. And the phenomenological approach is straightforwardly inapplicable to animal memory, since we lack access to animal phenomenology . The what-where-when criterion of episodicity, in contrast, is experimentally tractable, and research employing it has furnished important insights into the abilities of various nonhuman species to remember past events. Some researchers have found it expedient to introduce a concept of episodic-like memory meant to be free of any phenomenological connotations (Clayton &amp; Dickinson 1998). The concept of episodic-like memory may provide a means of reconciling research on animal episodic memory with the influential Bischof-K&ouml;hler hypothesis (Suddendorf &amp; Corballis 2007), according to which animals are &ldquo;stuck in time&rdquo;. The Bischof-K&ouml;hler hypothesis is itself controversial (Hoerl 2008), however, and the legitimacy of the concept of episodic-like memory remains a matter of contention (Droege 2012; Keven 2016; Malanowski 2016; J. Russell &amp; Hanna 2012). 3.2 Second-order content Second-order content-based approaches understand episodic memory as providing the rememberer with two 