The Rust Programming Language Keyboard shortcuts Press ← or → to navigate between chapters Press S or / to search in the book Press ? to show this help Press Esc to hide this help Auto Light Rust Coal Navy Ayu The Rust Programming Language The Rust Programming Language by Steve Klabnik, Carol Nichols, and Chris Krycho, with contributions from the Rust Community This version of the text assumes you’re using Rust 1.90.0 (released 2025-09-18) or later with edition = "2024" in the Cargo.toml file of all projects to configure them to use Rust 2024 Edition idioms. See the “Installation” section of Chapter 1 for instructions on installing or updating Rust, and see Appendix E for information on editions. The HTML format is available online at https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/book/ and offline with installations of Rust made with rustup ; run rustup doc --book to open. Several community translations are also available. This text is available in paperback and ebook format from No Starch Press . 🚨 Want a more interactive learning experience? Try out a different version of the Rust Book, featuring: quizzes, highlighting, visualizations, and more : https://rust-book.cs.brown.edu Foreword The Rust programming language has come a long way in a few short years, from its creation and incubation by a small and nascent community of enthusiasts, to becoming one of the most loved and in-demand programming languages in the world. Looking back, it was inevitable that the power and promise of Rust would turn heads and gain a foothold in systems programming. What was not inevitable was the global growth in interest and innovation that permeated through open source communities and catalyzed wide-scale adoption across industries. At this point in time, it is easy to point to the wonderful features that Rust has to offer to explain this explosion in interest and adoption. Who doesn’t want memory safety, and fast performance, and a friendly compiler, and great tooling, among a host of other wonderful features? The Rust language you see today combines years of research in systems programming with the practical wisdom of a vibrant and passionate community. This language was designed with purpose and crafted with care, offering developers a tool that makes it easier to write safe, fast, and reliable code. But what makes Rust truly special is its roots in empowering you, the user, to achieve your goals. This is a language that wants you to succeed, and the principle of empowerment runs through the core of the community that builds, maintains, and advocates for this language. Since the previous edition of this definitive text, Rust has further developed into a truly global and trusted language. The Rust Project is now robustly supported by the Rust Foundation, which also invests in key initiatives to ensure that Rust is secure, stable, and sustainable. This edition of The Rust Programming Language is a comprehensive update, reflecting the language’s evolution over the years and providing valuable new information. But it is not just a guide to syntax and libraries—it’s an invitation to join a community that values quality, performance, and thoughtful design. Whether you’re a seasoned developer looking to explore Rust for the first time or an experienced Rustacean looking to refine your skills, this edition offers something for everyone. The Rust journey has been one of collaboration, learning, and iteration. The growth of the language and its ecosystem is a direct reflection of the vibrant, diverse community behind it. The contributions of thousands of developers, from core language designers to casual contributors, are what make Rust such a unique and powerful tool. By picking up this book, you’re not just learning a new programming language—you’re joining a movement to make software better, safer, and more enjoyable to work with. Welcome to the Rust community! Bec Rumbul, Executive Director of the Rust Foundation Introduction Note: This edition of the book is the same as The Rust Programming Language available in print and ebook format from No Starch Press . Welcome to The Rust Programming Language , an introductory book about Rust. The Rust programming language helps you write faster, more reliable software. High-level ergonomics and low-level control are often at odds in programming language design; Rust challenges that conflict. Through balancing powerful technical capacity and a great developer experience, Rust gives you the option to control low-level details (such as memory usage) without all the hassle traditionally associated with such control. Who Rust Is For Rust is ideal for many people for a variety of reasons. Let’s look at a few of the most important groups. Teams of Developers Rust is proving to be a productive tool for collaborating among large teams of developers with varying levels of systems programming knowledge. Low-level code is prone to various subtle bugs, which in most other languages can only be caught through extensive testing and careful code review by experienced developers. In Rust, the compiler plays a gatekeeper role by refusing to compile code with these elusive bugs, including concurrency bugs. By working alongside the compiler, the team can spend its time focusing on the program’s logic rather than chasing down bugs. Rust also brings contemporary developer tools to the systems programming world: Cargo, the included dependency manager and build tool, makes adding, compiling, and managing dependencies painless and consistent across the Rust ecosystem. The rustfmt formatting tool ensures a consistent coding style across developers. The Rust Language Server powers integrated development environment (IDE) integration for code completion and inline error messages. By using these and other tools in the Rust ecosystem, developers can be productive while writing systems-level code. Students Rust is for students and those who are interested in learning about systems concepts. Using Rust, many people have learned about topics like operating systems development. The community is very welcoming and happy to answer students’ questions. Through efforts such as this book, the Rust teams want to make systems concepts more accessible to more people, especially those new to programming. Companies Hundreds of companies, large and small, use Rust in production for a variety of tasks, including command line tools, web services, DevOps tooling, embedded devices, audio and video analysis and transcoding, cryptocurrencies, bioinformatics, search engines, Internet of Things applications, machine learning, and even major parts of the Firefox web browser. Open Source Developers Rust is for people who want to build the Rust programming language, community, developer tools, and libraries. We’d love to have you contribute to the Rust language. People Who Value Speed and Stability Rust is for people who crave speed and stability in a language. By speed, we mean both how quickly Rust code can run and the speed at which Rust lets you write programs. The Rust compiler’s checks ensure stability through feature additions and refactoring. This is in contrast to the brittle legacy code in languages without these checks, which developers are often afraid to modify. By striving for zero-cost abstractions—higher-level features that compile to lower-level code as fast as code written manually—Rust endeavors to make safe code be fast code as well. The Rust language hopes to support many other users as well; those mentioned here are merely some of the biggest stakeholders. Overall, Rust’s greatest ambition is to eliminate the trade-offs that programmers have accepted for decades by providing safety and productivity, speed and ergonomics. Give Rust a try, and see if its choices work for you. Who This Book Is For This book assumes that you’ve written code in another programming language, but it doesn’t make any assumptions about which one. We’ve tried to make the material broadly accessible to those from a wide variety of programming backgrounds. We don’t spend a lot of time talking about what programming is or how to think about it. If you’re entirely new to programming, you would be better served by reading a book that specifically provides an introduction to programming. How to Use This Book In general, this book assumes that you’re reading it in sequence from front to back. Later chapters build on concepts in earlier chapters, and earlier chapters might not delve into details on a particular topic but will revisit the topic in a later chapter. You’ll find two kinds of chapters in this book: concept chapters and project chapters. In concept chapters, you’ll learn about an aspect of Rust. In project chapters, we’ll build small programs together, applying what you’ve learned so far. Chapter 2, Chapter 12, and Chapter 21 are project chapters; the rest are concept chapters. Chapter 1 explains how to install Rust, how to write a “Hello, world!” program, and how to use Cargo, Rust’s package manager and build tool. Chapter 2 is a hands-on introduction to writing a program in Rust, having you build up a number-guessing game. Here, we cover concepts at a high level, and later chapters will provide additional detail. If you want to get your hands dirty right away, Chapter 2 is the place for that. If you’re a particularly meticulous learner who prefers to learn every detail before moving on to the next, you might want to skip Chapter 2 and go straight to Chapter 3 , which covers Rust features that are similar to those of other programming languages; then, you can return to Chapter 2 when you’d like to work on a project applying the details you’ve learned. In Chapter 4 , you’ll learn about Rust’s ownership system. Chapter 5 discusses structs and methods. Chapter 6 covers enums, match expressions, and the if let and let...else control flow constructs. You’ll use structs and enums to make custom types. In Chapter 7 , you’ll learn about Rust’s module system and about privacy rules for organizing your code and its public application programming interface (API). Chapter 8 discusses some common collection data structures that the standard library provides: vectors, strings, and hash maps. Chapter 9 explores Rust’s error-handling philosophy and techniques. Chapter 10 digs into generics, traits, and lifetimes, which give you the power to define code that applies to multiple types. Chapter 11 is all about testing, which even with Rust’s safety guarantees is necessary to ensure that your program’s logic is correct. In Chapter 12 , we’ll build our own implementation of a subset of functionality from the grep command line tool that searches for text within files. For this, we’ll use many of the concepts we discussed in the previous chapters. Chapter 13 explores closures and iterators: features of Rust that come from functional programming languages. In Chapter 14 , we’ll examine Cargo in more depth and talk about best practices for sharing your libraries with others. Chapter 15 discusses smart pointers that the standard library provides and the traits that enable their functionality. In Chapter 16 , we’ll walk through different models of concurrent programming and talk about how Rust helps you program in multiple threads fearlessly. In Chapter 17 , we build on that by exploring Rust’s async and await syntax, along with tasks, futures, and streams, and the lightweight concurrency model they enable. Chapter 18 looks at how Rust idioms compare to object-oriented programming principles you might be familiar with. Chapter 19 is a reference on patterns and pattern matching, which are powerful ways of expressing ideas throughout Rust programs. Chapter 20 contains a smorgasbord of advanced topics of interest, including unsafe Rust, macros, and more about lifetimes, traits, types, functions, and closures. In Chapter 21 , we’ll complete a project in which we’ll implement a low-level multithreaded web server! Finally, some appendixes contain useful information about the language in a more reference-like format. Appendix A covers Rust’s keywords, Appendix B covers Rust’s operators and symbols, Appendix C covers derivable traits provided by the standard library, Appendix D covers some useful development tools, and Appendix E explains Rust editions. In Appendix F , you can find translations of the book, and in Appendix G we’ll cover how Rust is made and what nightly Rust is. There is no wrong way to read this book: If you want to skip ahead, go for it! You might have to jump back to earlier chapters if you experience any confusion. But do whatever works for you. An important part of the process of learning Rust is learning how to read the error messages the compiler displays: These will guide you toward working code. As such, we’ll provide many examples that don’t compile along with the error message the compiler will show you in each situation. Know that if you enter and run a random example, it may not compile! Make sure you read the surrounding text to see whether the example you’re trying to run is meant to error. In most situations, we’ll lead you to the correct version of any code that doesn’t compile. Ferris will also help you distinguish code that isn’t meant to work: Ferris Meaning This code does not compile! This code panics! This code does not produce the desired behavior. In most situations, we’ll lead you to the correct version of any code that doesn’t compile. Source Code The source files from which this book is generated can be found on GitHub . Getting Started Let’s start your Rust journey! There’s a lot to learn, but every journey starts somewhere. In this chapter, we’ll discuss: Installing Rust on Linux, macOS, and Windows Writing a program that prints Hello, world! Using cargo , Rust’s package manager and build system Installation Installation The first step is to install Rust. We’ll download Rust through rustup , a command line tool for managing Rust versions and associated tools. You’ll need an internet connection for the download. Note: If you prefer not to use rustup for some reason, please see the Other Rust Installation Methods page for more options. The following steps install the latest stable version of the Rust compiler. Rust’s stability guarantees ensure that all the examples in the book that compile will continue to compile with newer Rust versions. The output might differ slightly between versions because Rust often improves error messages and warnings. In other words, any newer, stable version of Rust you install using these steps should work as expected with the content of this book. Command Line Notation In this chapter and throughout the book, we’ll show some commands used in the terminal. Lines that you should enter in a terminal all start with $ . You don’t need to type the $ character; it’s the command line prompt shown to indicate the start of each command. Lines that don’t start with $ typically show the output of the previous command. Additionally, PowerShell-specific examples will use &gt; rather than $ . Installing rustup on Linux or macOS If you’re using Linux or macOS, open a terminal and enter the following command: $ curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 https://sh.rustup.rs -sSf | sh The command downloads a script and starts the installation of the rustup tool, which installs the latest stable version of Rust. You might be prompted for your password. If the install is successful, the following line will appear: Rust is installed now. Great! You will also need a linker , which is a program that Rust uses to join its compiled outputs into one file. It is likely you already have one. If you get linker errors, you should install a C compiler, which will typically include a linker. A C compiler is also useful because some common Rust packages depend on C code and will need a C compiler. On macOS, you can get a C compiler by running: $ xcode-select --install Linux users should generally install GCC or Clang, according to their distribution’s documentation. For example, if you use Ubuntu, you can install the build-essential package. Installing rustup on Windows On Windows, go to https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install and follow the instructions for installing Rust. At some point in the installation, you’ll be prompted to install Visual Studio. This provides a linker and the native libraries needed to compile programs. If you need more help with this step, see https://rust-lang.github.io/rustup/installation/windows-msvc.html . The rest of this book uses commands that work in both cmd.exe and PowerShell. If there are specific differences, we’ll explain which to use. Troubleshooting To check whether you have Rust installed correctly, open a shell and enter this line: $ rustc --version You should see the version number, commit hash, and commit date for the latest stable version that has been released, in the following format: rustc x.y.z (abcabcabc yyyy-mm-dd) If you see this information, you have installed Rust successfully! If you don’t see this information, check that Rust is in your %PATH% system variable as follows. In Windows CMD, use: &gt; echo %PATH% In PowerShell, use: &gt; echo $env:Path In Linux and macOS, use: $ echo $PATH If that’s all correct and Rust still isn’t working, there are a number of places you can get help. Find out how to get in touch with other Rustaceans (a silly nickname we call ourselves) on the community page . Updating and Uninstalling Once Rust is installed via rustup , updating to a newly released version is easy. From your shell, run the following update script: $ rustup update To uninstall Rust and rustup , run the following uninstall script from your shell: $ rustup self uninstall Reading the Local Documentation The installation of Rust also includes a local copy of the documentation so that you can read it offline. Run rustup doc to open the local documentation in your browser. Any time a type or function is provided by the standard library and you’re not sure what it does or how to use it, use the application programming interface (API) documentation to find out! Using Text Editors and IDEs This book makes no assumptions about what tools you use to author Rust code. Just about any text editor will get the job done! However, many text editors and integrated development environments (IDEs) have built-in support for Rust. You can always find a fairly current list of many editors and IDEs on the tools page on the Rust website. Working Offline with This Book In several examples, we will use Rust packages beyond the standard library. To work through those examples, you will either need to have an internet connection or to have downloaded those dependencies ahead of time. To download the dependencies ahead of time, you can run the following commands. (We’ll explain what cargo is and what each of these commands does in detail later.) $ cargo new get-dependencies $ cd get-dependencies $ cargo add rand@0.8.5 trpl@0.2.0 This will cache the downloads for these packages so you will not need to download them later. Once you have run this command, you do not need to keep the get-dependencies folder. If you have run this command, you can use the --offline flag with all cargo commands in the rest of the book to use these cached versions instead of attempting to use the network. Hello, World! Hello, World! Now that you’ve installed Rust, it’s time to write your first Rust program. It’s traditional when learning a new language to write a little program that prints the text Hello, world! to the screen, so we’ll do the same here! Note: This book assumes basic familiarity with the command line. Rust makes no specific demands about your editing or tooling or where your code lives, so if you prefer to use an IDE instead of the command line, feel free to use your favorite IDE. Many IDEs now have some degree of Rust support; check the IDE’s documentation for details. The Rust team has been focusing on enabling great IDE support via rust-analyzer . See Appendix D for more details. Project Directory Setup You’ll start by making a directory to store your Rust code. It doesn’t matter to Rust where your code lives, but for the exercises and projects in this book, we suggest making a projects directory in your home directory and keeping all your projects there. Open a terminal and enter the following commands to make a projects directory and a directory for the “Hello, world!” project within the projects directory. For Linux, macOS, and PowerShell on Windows, enter this: $ mkdir ~/projects $ cd ~/projects $ mkdir hello_world $ cd hello_world For Windows CMD, enter this: &gt; mkdir "%USERPROFILE%\projects" &gt; cd /d "%USERPROFILE%\projects" &gt; mkdir hello_world &gt; cd hello_world Rust Program Basics Next, make a new source file and call it main.rs . Rust files always end with the .rs extension. If you’re using more than one word in your filename, the convention is to use an underscore to separate them. For example, use hello_world.rs rather than helloworld.rs . Now open the main.rs file you just created and enter the code in Listing 1-1. Filename: main.rs fn main() { println!("Hello, world!"); } Listing 1-1 : A program that prints Hello, world! Save the file and go back to your terminal window in the ~/projects/hello_world directory. On Linux or macOS, enter the following commands to compile and run the file: $ rustc main.rs $ ./main Hello, world! On Windows, enter the command .\main instead of ./main : &gt; rustc main.rs &gt; .\main Hello, world! Regardless of your operating system, the string Hello, world! should print to the terminal. If you don’t see this output, refer back to the “Troubleshooting” part of the Installation section for ways to get help. If Hello, world! did print, congratulations! You’ve officially written a Rust program. That makes you a Rust programmer—welcome! The Anatomy of a Rust Program Let’s review this “Hello, world!” program in detail. Here’s the first piece of the puzzle: fn main() { } These lines define a function named main . The main function is special: It is always the first code that runs in every executable Rust program. Here, the first line declares a function named main that has no parameters and returns nothing. If there were parameters, they would go inside the parentheses ( () ). The function body is wrapped in {} . Rust requires curly brackets around all function bodies. It’s good style to place the opening curly bracket on the same line as the function declaration, adding one space in between. Note: If you want to stick to a standard style across Rust projects, you can use an automatic formatter tool called rustfmt to format your code in a particular style (more on rustfmt in Appendix D ). The Rust team has included this tool with the standard Rust distribution, as rustc is, so it should already be installed on your computer! The body of the main function holds the following code: #![allow(unused)] fn main() { println!("Hello, world!"); } This line does all the work in this little program: It prints text to the screen. There are three important details to notice here. First, println! calls a Rust macro. If it had called a function instead, it would be entered as println (without the ! ). Rust macros are a way to write code that generates code to extend Rust syntax, and we’ll discuss them in more detail in Chapter 20 . For now, you just need to know that using a ! means that you’re calling a macro instead of a normal function and that macros don’t always follow the same rules as functions. Second, you see the "Hello, world!" string. We pass this string as an argument to println! , and the string is printed to the screen. Third, we end the line with a semicolon ( ; ), which indicates that this expression is over, and the next one is ready to begin. Most lines of Rust code end with a semicolon. Compilation and Execution You’ve just run a newly created program, so let’s examine each step in the process. Before running a Rust progr