--> Epistemological Problems of Memory (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy) Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Menu Browse Table of Contents What's New Random Entry Chronological Archives About Editorial Information About the SEP Editorial Board How to Cite the SEP Special Characters Advanced Tools Contact Support SEP Support the SEP PDFs for SEP Friends Make a Donation SEPIA for Libraries Entry Navigation Entry Contents Bibliography Academic Tools Friends PDF Preview Author and Citation Info Back to Top Epistemological Problems of Memory First published Mon Mar 27, 2023 You tell your friend about a strange event you witnessed. Your friend presses you: how do you know it really happened? It&rsquo;s natural to answer that you saw it happen. But that can&rsquo;t be the full story of how you know. Past seeing, by itself, does not entirely explain present knowing or reasonable believing. When our past learning matters for what we can be confident of in the present, something connects the two. That something seems to be memory. Memory plays some role in our everyday believing, and upon closer inspection that role appears essential. Yet memory is secretive, always operating, almost always without our noticing, and often eluding any effort to appreciate its workings. Even in philosophy, we take for granted memory&rsquo;s unflagging efforts. There is some mystery about how it supports good inductive reasoning, for example, though we recognize that good inductive reasoning relies on past observation. And memory is what allows this indispensable relying, almost by magic. How does memory help us believe and reason well, if it ever truly does? What might bottle it up and stop it? This entry surveys influential answers. 1. The Nature of Memory 1.1 Human Memory 1.2 Theories of memory 2. Memory and Justification 2.1 Foundationalism and Coherentism 2.2 Internalism and Externalism 2.2.1 The Problem of Forgotten Evidence 2.2.2 The Problem of Stored Beliefs 2.2.3 The Problem of Forgotten Defeat 2.3 Time-slice and Historical Theories 2.4 Preservationism and Generativism 2.4.1 Preservationism as Anti-generativism 2.4.2 Preservationism as an Historical Theory 3. Justification and Beyond 3.1 Testimony and Memory 3.2 Extended Mind 3.3 Metacognition 3.4 Knowledge-How 3.5 Forgetting 3.6 Skepticism Bibliography Academic Tools Other Internet Resources Related Entries 1. The Nature of Memory The epistemology of memory has been the epistemology of human memory. It&rsquo;s the sort of memory we are most familiar with. Perhaps this everyday familiarity is informative enough for our epistemological theorizing. We can do well without looking closely at how human memory works, and the psychology and philosophy here can have a crisp and little-trafficked border. The epistemology of memory up through the twentieth century often carried on as if this were so. But more recently epistemologists have favored an empirically-informed approach. 1.1 Human Memory Human memory is not one but several things or systems (Michaelian 2011c). The systems play different roles, most of which we might call &ldquo;remembering&rdquo;, even though the remembering may vary notably from one system to the next. Some memory systems also help us imagine possibilities or think about the future, however. As the entry on memory already taxonomizes human memory systems in detail, this entry will not. It will, however, briefly overview some of them. Psychologists and philosophers often distinguish declarative from non-declarative memory, which may roughly differentiate memory for accessible information from memory for everything else. Declarative memory includes episodic and semantic memory (Tulving 1972). How best to divide episodic and semantic memory turns out to be delicate and controversial. But they at least superficially differ in many ways, including in their characteristic content. To simplify: the content of semantic memory is propositional, while the content of episodic memory is (a representation of) an event from the rememberer&rsquo;s past. Your friend might remember that a strange event took place recently, because you told her so. But despite your telling, she is in no position to remember the event . Here, she is the rememberer, and the event was in your personal past, not hers. The epistemology of memory has focused on declarative memory, perhaps to no one&rsquo;s surprise. Epistemology is the philosophical study of knowledge and of what makes believing reasonable. The epistemology of memory examines memory&rsquo;s role in this. Epistemology covers most often the kinds of knowledge and reasonable believing that pertain to accessible information. Declarative memory seems more relevant here than non-declarative. Moreover, since epistemology covers most often the kinds of knowledge and reasonable believing that have propositional content, semantic memory seems more relevant here than episodic. The line from remembering that p to knowing that p makes fewer corkscrews than the line from remembering some event concerning p to knowing that p . Consequently, semantic memory has dominated the epistemology of memory. But in the last few decades, episodic memory has stolen the show in the broader philosophy of memory. It&rsquo;s safe to bet that a renaissance in the epistemology of episodic memory is not far off. Recent, empirically-minded epistemology of memory has been sensitive to a key feature that at least some of our memory systems seem to bear: they are constructive. It is most clearly the case that episodic memory in particular is constructive (for the case laid out for a general audience, see Schacter 1996, 2001). Remembering events is not the straightforward affair we might have supposed. We might have supposed that memory functions like an archive for the records of what we have experienced; to learn is to deposit into the archive, to remember is to withdraw an unchanged deposit, and to forget is for the archive to malfunction. The prevailing view now, however, is that memory is constructive, and not just occasionally but normally (Michaelian 2011b, 2016). Remembering is not (simply) reproducing a record, but generating new content. This may seem to suggest that memory&rsquo;s role in our knowing and reasonably believing is more limited than we&rsquo;d thought. New content from memory is suspicious&mdash;likely inaccurate or unsupported&mdash;particularly if memory is supposed to function like an archive. But the evidence to support this suspicion is wanting (Michaelian 2011b, 2016). Episodic memory is generative, but not in general at the cost of truth. Puddifoot and Bortolotti (2019) argue, for instance, that the cognitive mechanisms responsible for certain false memory beliefs are indeed &ldquo;epistemically innocent&rdquo; , as they overall increase a subject&rsquo;s chances of having other true beliefs or knowledge (see also Bortolotti and Sullivan-Bissett 2018). Episodic memory&rsquo;s epistemic credentials are not clearly comprised. Section 2.4 below further explores the significance of memory construction in epistemology. 1.2 Theories of memory A theory of memory is roughly a theory of how memory works or of what remembering consists in. Almost no theories of memory are essentially epistemological. Almost none require any discussion of epistemology. For that reason, this entry will say little about theories of memory (but see entry on memory ). One unique theory of memory, however, merits coverage here: the epistemic theory of memory. Why? For one, it is essentially epistemological. And for another, it stands apart from what most of this entry will focus on. Section 2 covers theories that, in a way, use memory to illuminate epistemology, and epistemology to illuminate memory&rsquo;s epistemic power . The theories comment on the conditions in which memory provides or cannot provide some epistemic good, and why. The epistemic theory of memory, however, uses epistemology to illuminate the memory&rsquo;s nature . Rather than explain knowing in terms of remembering, the epistemic theory explains remembering in terms of knowing. The epistemic theory places an epistemic necessary condition on remembering. More specifically, propositional remembering requires knowing (Anscombe 1981; Ayer 1956; Audi 2002; Locke 1971; Malcolm 1963; Moon 2013; Owens 2000; Pappas 1980; Williamson 2000). Any subject who remembers that p knows that p . This theory can lift a lantern to the nature of remembering, as it implies that every necessary condition for knowing is also one for remembering. If knowing requires believing, remembering requires it too. If knowing requires truth, so does remembering. And so on. Stronger versions of the epistemic theory say that remembering at a moment requires knowing not only then but also previously. They add, moreover, that that earlier knowing explains, or bears some other special connection to, the later knowing. Any subject who remembers that p at a moment knows that p then because she knew that p before. The epistemic theory faces more than one danger. To begin, it is worth noting that the different versions of the epistemic theory generally will not be complete theories of remembering. They state just necessary conditions on remembering, not sufficient conditions. They might be correct, but they do not say all that remembering is. Indeed, they often could say much more. Suppose remembering requires knowing because of past knowing. The &ldquo;because&rdquo; here masks an omission. How does one know at one time because of knowing at an earlier time? The most natural answer is: by memory. But we should hesitate to accept that answer here. The epistemic theory is supposed to be clarifying what remembering is. Paired with the natural answer, the epistemic theory says roughly that to remember requires memory to connect knowing with earlier knowing. The explanation of remembering critically involves some residual, opaque memory activity. An explanation minimally citing memory, or one further elucidating its activity, might be more insightful. A more common criticism of the epistemic theory is that knowledge requires something that remembering does not (Bernecker 2010; see also Audi 1995; Lai 2022). One form of the criticism goes as follows. Knowledge roughly requires good and undiminished reason to believe. Suppose you remember that p &mdash;you&rsquo;ve come to know that p and therefore have reason good enough for knowing that p . Later you gain reason to doubt that p (see discussion of defeaters in Section 2.2.3 ). Your reason to believe that p is no longer good enough for knowing that p . But can you now remember that p ? The epistemic theory must say, perhaps unintuitively, you cannot. Perhaps even worse, the epistemic theory seems to imply that you remembered that p up until you gained the reason to doubt. So you recently remembered that p , but can remember no longer, and not because of any forgetting. It&rsquo;s because of some learning&mdash;your gaining reason to doubt. It may instead be more plausible to suppose the epistemic theory is mistaken. Remembering does not require good and undiminished reason to believe, in which case it does not require knowing. Also, if the epistemic theory is correct, there is no remembering falsely. Knowledge requires truth. Remembering, if it requires knowing, also requires truth. Propositional mis remembering, then, isn&rsquo;t remembering at all. At best it&rsquo;s mere apparent remembering. It&rsquo;s not memory&rsquo;s doing. In other words, whether a subject is remembering that p is not settled by the mechanisms that produce p as an output for the subject and by the functions of those mechanisms. Instead, the accuracy of p also matters for whether the subject counts as remembering. The epistemic theory is only as plausible as this consequence (cf. De Brigard 2014). Finally, the epistemic theory&rsquo;s prospects may depend on the empirical matter of whether and how memory is generative. Perhaps research in neuroscience and cognitive psychology could make it plausible that propositional remembering is in some cases generative. This would doom at least the stronger versions of the epistemic theory. Knowing that p in the past would be unnecessary for remembering that p now, if memory can generate p as the content of some propositional remembering. Defenses of the epistemic theory tend to suggest that its alternatives are themselves flawed (Adams 2011; James 2017) or that the alleged counterexamples to it are insufficiently clear (Moon 2013; Sakuragi 2013). 2. Memory and Justification We seem to have epistemic justification for much of what we believe. And memory seems to play some role in our having this justification. Suppose appearances are correct here. Just what is memory&rsquo;s role? What can memory do, what can&rsquo;t it do, and why? There are many theories about the nature of epistemic justification, and they might shed light on memory&rsquo;s role. Or things might work the other way around&mdash;our intuitive judgments about memory&rsquo;s role could shed light on which theories of justification are correct, and which we should abandon. This section begins to explore memory&rsquo;s relationship with justification. 2.1 Foundationalism and Coherentism One way to illuminate memory&rsquo;s justificatory role is to turn the spotlight to the structure of justification. Some of what we justifiedly believe helps us justifiedly believe other things. But, according to foundationalism, not all that justifies stands in need of justification itself. There are foundations for our justification, places where we need look for no further support. If there is foundational justification, memory might provide some of it. Perhaps memory is not relevantly different from perception, which is a good candidate for being a basic source of justification. Visual perception provides justification for believing how spatially distant things are. Memory simply provides justification for believing how temporally distant things are (Taylor 1956). Or memory might not provide foundational support. Instead all support it gives might come from other justifiers; it does not sit at the bottom of the structure. Most contemporary epistemology accepts foundationalism (see entry on foundationalist theories of justification ). So, several sections below help locate memory in the foundationalist structure. But there are alternatives to foundationalism. One alternative is coherentism, according to which, roughly, a belief is justified if and only if it coheres with other beliefs (see entry on coherentist theories of justification ). Beliefs that fit together well are mutually supporting, or supporting as a set. Coherentism is not as popular as it once was, but still has some advocates (Poston 2014). But even if coherentism is false, coherence relations may still matter for justification. Coherence might not create justification, but it may increase any already present (Lewis 1946). Thanks to memory you might have several beliefs that all fit together. If these beliefs are already justified, their fitting together could boost their justification. And even if coherence does not help, incoherence may hurt (Audi 1995; Olsson 2017). A poor fit among recollections might eliminate justification that memory would otherwise help provide. 2.2 Internalism and Externalism Learning can be understood as gaining evidence. And we seem to keep some evidence over time. Presumably it is memory that does this keeping. A natural way of understanding how memory helps us have justification centers on the evidence we have thanks to memory. This fits well with internalism about epistemic justification. Internalism says a subject&rsquo;s justification is settled by her mental life. Mentally identical subjects will be equally justified in having the same doxastic attitudes toward the same propositions. Memory is part of the mental life. We needn&rsquo;t look beyond the evidence memory provides to see how it helps us have justification. Contrast internalism with externalism about epistemic justification, which says non-mental factors can result in differences in justification, even among mentally identical subjects (see entry on internalist vs. externalist conceptions of epistemic justification ). According to externalism, something contingent that makes no difference to a subject&rsquo;s mental life can make a difference to her justification. Her memory may tend to err, for example. This tendency has to do with facts external to the mind&mdash;facts about how for instance the past was. Perhaps if memory is to provide justification, it will tend to get these facts right. 2.2.1 The Problem of Forgotten Evidence A few apparent epistemological problems of memory may favor externalism over internalism. One of these is the problem of forgotten evidence (Goldman 1999; Harman 1986; Owens 1999; Pappas 1980; see also Frise 2015 [ Other Internet Resources ]; Huemer 1999; Madison 2017; McCain 2015). We tend to use evidence when forming justified beliefs. But we also tend to forget this evidence, even while continuing to believe. Pappas (1983: 266 n.1) thinks &ldquo;one typically loses one&rsquo;s original justification&rdquo;. When the originally justified belief is kept but the original evidence for it is not, its justification might be replaced by other justification, or lost and not replaced, or not lost at all. In many cases it is intuitive that the kept belief is still justified one way or another. The problem of forgotten evidence is that of explaining how this could be. Some externalist theories seem to have an explanation readily available. One such theory is process reliabilism (see entry on reliabilist epistemology ). Very roughly, it says a belief&rsquo;s justification depends on the reliability of the process that forms or keeps the belief. Memory seems relevantly reliable. Even if a subject forgets her original evidence for a belief that was originally justified and that she keeps, she may keep the belief due to a reliable memory process. Reliabilism appears able to explain how the belief is still justified&mdash;it&rsquo;s because of the memory process&rsquo;s reliability. But internalist theories have other resources. A subject may have forgotten her original evidence, but memory could still provide her with something that justifies a belief she has kept and that was originally justified: seeming recollection. A subject who seems to recollect that p has prima facie justification for believing that p (Pollock 1986). (Prima facie justification is an epistemic good that suffices for overall justification, as long as the subject has no reason to doubt the belief or its justification). If that&rsquo;s right, seeming recollection could provide justification even in a case of forgotten evidence. This recollection is a part of the mental life, so internalism can appeal to it in solving the problem of forgotten evidence. There are different accounts of why seeming recollection justifies. The phenomenology of a recollective experience may account for it (Feldman &amp; Conee 2001; Madison 2014). Or the persistence of seeming recollection, even in the face of evidence of its inaccuracy, may account for the justification (Brogaard 2017). Or, seeming recollection that p may justify believing that p because it justifies believing something else that is relevant, namely, that one justifiedly believed that p in that past (Schroer 2008). There might be no relevant difference between, on the one hand, seeming to recollect or seeming to remember or seeming to recall and, on the other, recollecting or remembering or recalling. Seeming to recollect may be sufficient for remembering. But it is insufficient for knowing. (One might, after all, seem to recollect a falsehood, but one cannot know a falsehood.) If seeming recollection suffices for remembering, then the epistemic theory of memory appears mistaken. The epistemic theory, again, says that a subject who remembers that p knows that p , perhaps because of her past knowing that p . But some seeming recollection would allow remembering without knowing. 2.2.2 The Problem of Stored Beliefs Even if seeming recollection solves one problem, it is a resource of limited use. It does not obviously account for all the justification memory provides. It is plausible that at any given time, thanks to memory, we have a vast number of beliefs. But we are not seemingly recollecting the content of all these beliefs. Indeed, at best we recollect the content of few at any particular time. The beliefs we are not recollecting are sometimes called &ldquo;stored&rdquo; or &ldquo;dispositional&rdquo; or &ldquo;nonoccurrent&rdquo;. Some of these beliefs are justified. The problem of stored beliefs is that of accounting for this justification. (Pappas 1980 discusses a knowledge-version of the problem). If internalism is true, something mental other than seeming recollection accounts for this justification. But it&rsquo;s at least initially difficult to see what that might be (Goldman 1999; Senor 1993; Moon 2012a presents internalism with a knowledge-version of the problem). Externalist theories like reliabilism, however, can still say the reliability of the memory process responsible for these stored beliefs helps justify them. Seeming recollection apparently does not solve the problem of stored beliefs. But something closely related might help. It&rsquo;s not just recollecting, but being disposed to recollect , that helps justify (Audi 1995; Conee &amp; Feldman 2011; Ginet 1975; McCain 2014; see also Feldman 1988; Piazza 2009). Having a disposition to recollect p provides justification for believing p. Typically, a justified stored belief is one the subject is disposed to recall. This disposition makes sense of the stored belief&rsquo;s justification. Or perhaps a seeming to recollect can itself have a dispositional status, just as a belief can have this status, and so seemings do justify the right stored beliefs after all (Madison 2014). It is controversial whether recollective dispositions justify. McGrath (2007) argues they do not, for if they do, it follows there is justification in some cases of forgetting where intuitively there is no justification. Kelly (2016) argues that what matters for justification is not a recollective disposition, but instead remembering, and not all remembering involves a recollective disposition. Frise (2017a) argues that it is insufficiently clear just when a subject has a recollective disposition, and also that in some cases in which a subject is disposed to recall that p , the justified attitude for her toward p is nonetheless suspending judgment rather than believing. McGrath (2016) and Senor (1993) press a more basic question: exactly why is a disposition to recollect justifying evidence? Not all attempts to solve the problem of stored beliefs appeal to recollective dispositions or even to the reliability of the processes that keep stored beliefs. One potential way out is neutral between internalism and externalism. It denies there are stored beliefs at all, so there is no justification of stored beliefs to account for. Frise (2018a) argues that if representationalism&mdash;a leading theory on the nature of belief&mdash;is true, then we have no stored beliefs. This is because human memory turns out not to function in the ways required for storing beliefs. According to representationalism, believing that p requires bearing a special relation to a mental representation that p (see entry on belief ). Frise argues human memory does not store many representations, and that our relation to stored representations is generally underdetermined. Representationalism may be false. But if true, the problem of stored beliefs is illusory. 2.2.3 The Problem of Forgotten Defeat Seeming recollection seems to help solve the problem of forgotten evidence, but to