--> The Philosophy of Neuroscience (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy) Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Menu Browse Table of Contents What's New Random Entry Chronological Archives About Editorial Information About the SEP Editorial Board How to Cite the SEP Special Characters Advanced Tools Contact Support SEP Support the SEP PDFs for SEP Friends Make a Donation SEPIA for Libraries Entry Navigation Entry Contents Bibliography Academic Tools Friends PDF Preview Author and Citation Info Back to Top The Philosophy of Neuroscience First published Mon Jun 7, 1999; substantive revision Tue Aug 6, 2019 Over the past four decades, philosophy of science has grown increasingly &ldquo;local&rdquo;. Concerns have switched from general features of scientific practice to concepts, issues, and puzzles specific to particular disciplines. Philosophy of neuroscience is one natural result. This emerging area was also spurred by remarkable growth in the neurosciences themselves. Cognitive and computational neuroscience continues to encroach directly on issues traditionally addressed within the humanities, including the nature of consciousness, action, knowledge, and normativity. Cellular, molecular, and behavioral neuroscience using animal models increasingly encroaches on cognitive neuroscience&rsquo;s domain. Empirical discoveries about brain structure and function suggest ways that &ldquo;naturalistic&rdquo; programs might develop in detail, beyond the abstract philosophical considerations in their favor. The literature has distinguished &ldquo;philosophy of neuroscience&rdquo; from &ldquo;neurophilosophy&rdquo; for two decades. The former concerns foundational issues within the neurosciences. The latter concerns application of neuroscientific concepts to traditional philosophical questions. Exploring various concepts of representation employed in neuroscientific theories is an example of the former. Examining implications of neurological syndromes for the concept of a unified self is an example of the latter. In this entry, we will develop this distinction further and discuss examples of both. Just as has happened in the field&rsquo;s history, work in both of these areas is scattered throughout most all sections below. Throughout we will try to specify which area landmark work falls into, when this location isn&rsquo;t obvious. One exciting aspect about working in philosophy of neuroscience or neurophilosophy is the continual element of surprise. Both fields depend squarely on developments in neuroscience, and one simply has no inkling what&rsquo;s coming down the pike in that incredibly fast-moving science. Last year&rsquo;s speculative fiction is this year&rsquo;s scientific reality. But this feature makes a once-a-half decade updated encyclopedia entry difficult to manage. The scientific details philosophers were reflecting on at past updates can now read woefully dated. Yet one also wants to capture some history of the ongoing fields. Our solution to this dilemma has been to keep previous discussions, to reflect that history, but to add more recent scientific and philosophical updates, not only to sections of this entry added at later times, but also peppered through the earlier discussions. It&rsquo;s not always a perfect solution, but it does preserve something of the history of the philosophy of neuroscience and neurophilosophy against the continual advances in the sciences these philosophical fields depend upon. 1. Before and After Neurophilosophy 2. Eliminative Materialism and Philosophy Neuralized 3. Neuroscience and Psychosemantics 4. Consciousness Explained? 5. Locating Cognitive Functions: From Lesion Studies to Functional Neuroimaging 6. A Result of the Co-evolutionary Research Ideology: Philosophy&rsquo;s Emphasis on Cognitive and Computational Neuroscience 7. Developments in the Philosophy of Neuroscience 8. Developments over the Second Decade of the Twenty-First Century Bibliography Academic Tools Other Internet Resources Related Entries 1. Before and After Neurophilosophy Historically, neuroscientific discoveries exerted little influence on the details of materialist philosophies of mind. The &ldquo;neuroscientific milieu&rdquo; of the past half-century has made it harder for philosophers to adopt substantive dualisms about mind. But even the &ldquo;type-type&rdquo; or &ldquo;central state&rdquo; identity theories that rose to brief prominence in the late 1950s (Place 1956; Smart 1959) drew upon few actual details of the emerging neurosciences. Recall the favorite early example of a psychoneural identity claim: &ldquo;pain is identical to C-fiber firing&rdquo;. The &ldquo;C-fibers&rdquo; turned out to be related to only a single aspect of pain transmission (Hardcastle 1997). Early identity theorists did not emphasize psychoneural identity hypotheses. Their &ldquo;neuro&rdquo; terms were admittedly placeholders for concepts from future neuroscience. Their arguments and motivations were philosophical, even if the ultimate justification of the program was held to be empirical. The apology offered by early identity theorists for ignoring scientific details was that the neuroscience at that time was too nascent to provide any plausible identities. But potential identities were afoot. David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel&rsquo;s (1962) electrophysiological demonstrations of the receptive field properties of visual neurons had been reported with great fanfare. Using their techniques, neurophysiologists began discovering neurons throughout visual cortex responsive to increasingly abstract features of visual stimuli: from edges to motion direction to colors to properties of faces and hands. More notably, Donald Hebb had published The Organization of Behavior (1949) more than a decade earlier. He had offered detailed explanations of psychological phenomena in terms of neural mechanisms and anatomical circuits. His psychological explananda included features of perception, learning, memory, and even emotional disorders. He offered these explanations as potential identities. (See the Introduction to his 1949). One philosopher who did take note of some available neuroscientific detail at the time was Barbara Von Eckardt Klein (Von Eckardt Klein 1975). She discussed the identity theory with respect to sensations of touch and pressure, and incorporated then-current hypotheses about neural coding of sensation modality, intensity, duration, and location as theorized by Mountcastle, Libet, and Jasper. Yet she was a glaring exception. By and large, available neuroscience at the time was ignored by both philosophical friends and foes of early identity theories. Philosophical indifference to neuroscientific detail became &ldquo;principled&rdquo; with the rise and prominence of functionalism in the 1970s. The functionalists&rsquo; favorite argument was based on multiple realizability: a given mental state or event can be realized in a wide variety of physical types (Putnam 1967; Fodor 1974). Consequently, a detailed understanding of one type of realizing physical system (e.g., brains) will not shed light on the fundamental nature of mind. Psychology is thus autonomous from any science of one of its possible physical realizers (see the entry on multiple realizability in this Encyclopedia). Instead of neuroscience, scientifically-minded philosophers influenced by functionalism sought evidence and inspiration from cognitive psychology and artificial intelligence. These disciplines abstract away from underlying physical mechanisms and emphasize the &ldquo;information-bearing&rdquo; properties and capacities of representations (Haugeland 1985). At this same time, however, neuroscience was delving directly into cognition, especially learning and memory. For example, Eric Kandel (1976) proposed presynaptic mechanisms governing transmitter release rate as a cell-biological explanation of simple forms of associative learning. With Robert Hawkins (Hawkins and Kandel 1984) he demonstrated how cognitivist aspects of associative learning (e.g., blocking, second-order conditioning, overshadowing) could be explained cell-biologically by sequences and combinations of these basic forms implemented in higher neural anatomies. Working on the post-synaptic side, neuroscientists began unraveling the cellular mechanisms of long term potentiation (LTP; Bliss and Lomo 1973). Physiological psychologists quickly noted its explanatory potential for various forms of learning and memory. [ 1 ] Yet few &ldquo;materialist&rdquo; philosophers paid any attention. Why should they? Most were convinced functionalists. They believed that the &ldquo;implementation level&rdquo; details might be important to the clinician, but were irrelevant to the theorist of mind. A major turning point in philosophers&rsquo; interest in neuroscience came with the publication of Patricia Churchland&rsquo;s Neurophilosophy (1986). The Churchlands (Patricia and Paul) were already notorious for advocating eliminative materialism (see the next section). In her (1986) book, Churchland distilled eliminativist arguments of the past decade, unified the pieces of the philosophy of science underlying them, and sandwiched the philosophy between a five-chapter introduction to neuroscience and a 70-page chapter on three then-current theories of brain function. She was unapologetic about her intent. She was introducing philosophy of science to neuroscientists and neuroscience to philosophers. Nothing could be more obvious, she insisted, than the relevance of empirical facts about how the brain works to concerns in the philosophy of mind. Her term for this interdisciplinary method was &ldquo;co-evolution&rdquo; (borrowed from biology). This method seeks resources and ideas from anywhere on the theory hierarchy above or below the question at issue. Standing on the shoulders of philosophers like Quine and Sellars, Churchland insisted that specifying some point where neuroscience ends and philosophy of science begins is hopeless because the boundaries are poorly defined. Neurophilosophers would pick and choose resources from both disciplines as they saw fit. Three themes predominated Churchland&rsquo;s philosophical discussion: developing an alternative to the logical empiricist theory of intertheoretic reduction; responding to property-dualistic arguments based on subjectivity and sensory qualia; and responding to anti-reductionist multiple realizability arguments. These projects remained central to neurophilosophy for more than a decade after Churchland&rsquo;s book appeared. John Bickle (1998) extended the principal insight of Clifford Hooker&rsquo;s (1981a,b,c) post-empiricist theory of intertheoretic reduction. He quantified key notions using a model-theoretic account of theory structure adapted from the structuralist program in philosophy of science (Balzer, Moulines, and Sneed 1987). He also made explicit a form of argument to draw ontological conclusions (cross-theoretic identities, revisions, or eliminations) from the nature of the intertheoretic reduction relations obtaining in specific cases. For example, it is routinely concluded that visible light, a theoretical posit of optics, is electromagnetic radiation within specified wavelengths, a theoretical posit of electromagnetism; in this case, a cross-theoretic ontological identity. It is also routine to conclude that phlogiston does not exist: an elimination of a kind from our scientific ontology. Bickle explicated the nature of the reduction relation in a specific case using a semi-formal account of &ldquo;intertheoretic approximation&rdquo; inspired by structuralist results. Paul Churchland (1996) carried on the attack on property-dualistic arguments for the irreducibility of conscious experience and sensory qualia. He argued that acquiring some knowledge of existing sensory neuroscience increases one&rsquo;s ability to &ldquo;imagine&rdquo; or &ldquo;conceive of&rdquo; a comprehensive neurobiological explanation of consciousness. He defended this conclusion using a characteristically imaginative thought-experiment based on the history of optics and electromagnetism. Finally, criticisms of the multiple realizability argument flourish&mdash;and are challenged&mdash;to the present day. Although the multiple realizability argument remains influential among nonreductive physicalists, it no longer commands the near-universal acceptance it once did. Replies to the multiple realizability argument based on neuroscientific details have appeared. For example, William Bechtel and Jennifer Mundale (1999) argue that neuroscientists use psychological criteria in brain mapping studies. This fact undercuts the likelihood that psychological kinds are multiply realized (for a review of recent developments see the entry on multiple realizability in this Encyclopedia). 2. Eliminative Materialism and Philosophy Neuralized Eliminative materialism (EM), in the form advocated most aggressively by Paul and Patricia Churchland, is the conjunction of two claims. First, our common sense &ldquo;belief-desire&rdquo; conception of mental events and processes, our &ldquo;folk psychology&rdquo;, is a false and misleading account of the causes of human behavior. Second, like other false conceptual frameworks from both folk theory and the history of science, it will be replaced by, rather than smoothly reduced or incorporated into, a future neuroscience. The Churchlands&rsquo; characterized folk psychology as the collection of common homilies invoked (mostly implicitly) to explain human behavior causally. You ask why Marica is not accompanying me this evening. I reply that our grandson needed sitting. You nod sympathetically. You understand my explanation because you share with me a generalization that relates beliefs about taking care of grandchildren, desires to help daughters and to spend time with grandchildren compared to enjoying a night out, and so on. This is just one of a huge collection of homilies about the causes of human behavior that EM claims to be flawed beyond potential revision. Although this example involves only beliefs and desires, folk psychology contains an extensive repertoire of propositional attitudes in its explanatory nexus: hopes, intentions, fears, imaginings, and more. EMists predict that a future, genuinely scientific psychology or neuroscience will eventually eschew all of these, and replace them with incommensurable states and dynamics of neuro-cognition. EM is physicalist in one traditional philosophical sense. It postulates that some future brain science will be ultimately the correct account of (human) behavior. It is eliminative in predicting the future rejection of folk psychological kinds from our post-neuroscientific ontology. EM proponents often employ scientific analogies (Feyerabend 1963; Paul Churchland, 1981). Oxidative reactions as characterized within elemental chemistry bear no resemblance to phlogiston release. Even the &ldquo;direction&rdquo; of the two processes differ. Oxygen is gained when an object burns (or rusts), phlogiston was said to be lost. The result of this theoretical change was the elimination of phlogiston from our scientific ontology. There is no such thing. For the same reasons, according to EM, continuing development in neuroscience will reveal that there are no such things as beliefs, desires, and the rest of the propositional attitudes as characterized by common sense. Here we focus only on the way that neuroscientific results have shaped the arguments for EM. Surprisingly, only one argument has been strongly influenced. (Most arguments for EM stress failures of folk psychology as an explanatory theory of behavior.) This argument is based on a development in cognitive and computational neuroscience that might provide a genuine alternative to the representations and computations implicit in folk psychological generalizations. Many eliminative materialists assume that folk psychology is committed to propositional representations and computations over their contents that mimic logical inferences (Paul Churchland 1981; Stich 1983; Patricia Churchland 1986). [ 2 ] Even though discovering an alternative to this view has been an eliminativist goal for some time, some eliminativists hold that neuroscience only began delivering this alternative over the past thirty years. Points in and trajectories through vector spaces, as an interpretation of synaptic events and neural activity patterns in biological and artificial neural networks are the key features of this alternative. The differences between these notions of cognitive representation and transformations, and those of the propositional attitudes of folk psychology, provide the basis for one argument for EM (Paul Churchland 1987). However, this argument will be opaque to those with no background in cognitive and computational neuroscience, so we present a few details. With these details in place, we will return to this argument for EM (five paragraphs below). At one level of analysis, the basic computational element of a neural network, biological or artificial, is the nerve cell, or neuron. Mathematically, neurons can be represented as simple computational devices, transforming inputs into output. Both inputs and outputs reflect biological variables. For our discussion, we assume that neuronal inputs are frequencies of action potentials (neuronal &ldquo;spikes&rdquo;) in the axons whose terminal branches synapse onto the neuron in question, while neuronal output is the frequency of action potentials generated in its axon after processing the inputs. A neuron thereby computes its total input, usually treated mathematically as the sum of the products of the signal strength along each input line times the synaptic weight on that line. It then computes a new activation state based on its total input and current activation state, and a new output state based on its new activation value. The neuron&rsquo;s output state is transmitted as a signal strength to whatever neurons its axon synapses on. The output state reflects systematically the neuron&rsquo;s new activation state. [ 3 ] Analyzed in this fashion, both biological and artificial neural networks are interpreted naturally as vector-to-vector transformers . The input vector consists of values reflecting activity patterns in axons synapsing on the network&rsquo;s neurons from outside (e.g., from sensory transducers or other neural networks). The output vector consists of values reflecting the activity patterns generated in the network&rsquo;s neurons that project beyond the net (e.g., to motor effectors or other neural networks). Given that each neuron&rsquo;s activity depends partly upon their total input, and its total input depends partly on synaptic weights (e.g., presynaptic neurotransmitter release rate, number and efficacy of postsynaptic receptors, availability of enzymes in synaptic cleft), the capacity of biological networks to change their synaptic weights make them plastic vector-to-vector transformers. In principle, a biological network with plastic synapses can come to implement any vector-to-vector transformation that its composition permits (number of input units, output units, processing layers, recurrency, cross-connections, etc.) (discussed in Paul Churchland, 1987, with references to the primary scientific literature). Figure 1. The anatomical organization of the cerebellum provides a clear example of a network amenable to this computational interpretation. Consider Figure 1 . The cerebellum is the bulbous convoluted structure dorsal to the brainstem. A variety of studies (behavioral, neuropsychological, single-cell electrophysiological) implicate this structure in motor integration and fine motor coordination. Mossy fibers (axons) from neurons outside the cerebellum synapse on cerebellar granule cells, which in turn project to parallel fibers. Activity patterns across the collection of mossy fibers (frequency of action potentials per time unit in each fiber projecting into the cerebellum) provide values for the input vector. Parallel fibers make multiple synapses on the dendritic trees and cell bodies of cerebellular Purkinje neurons. Each Purkinje neuron &ldquo;sums&rdquo; its post-synaptic potentials (PSPs) and emits a train of action potentials down its axon based (partly) on its total input and previous activation state. Purkinje axons project outside the cerebellum. The network&rsquo;s output vector is thus the ordered values representing the pattern of activity generated in each Purkinje axon. Changes to the efficacy of individual synapses on the parallel fibers and the Purkinje neurons alter the resulting PSPs in Purkinje axons, generating different axonal spiking frequencies. Computationally, this amounts to a different output vector to the same input activity pattern&mdash;plasticity. [ 4 ] Figure 2. This interpretation puts the useful mathematical resources of dynamical systems into the hands of computational neuroscientists. Vector spaces are an example. Learning can then be characterized fruitfully in terms of changes in synaptic weights in the network and subsequent reduction of error in network output. (This approach to learning goes back to Hebb 1949, although the vector-space interpretation was not part of Hebb&rsquo;s account.) A useful representation of this account uses a synaptic weight-error space . One dimension represents the global error in the network&rsquo;s output to a given task, and all other dimensions represent the weight values of individual synapses in the network. Consider Figure 2 . Points in this multi-dimensional state space represent the global performance error correlated with each possible collection of synaptic weights in the network. As the weights change with each performance, in accordance with a biologically-inspired learning algorithm, the global error of network performance continually decreases. The changing synaptic weights across the network with each training episode reduces the total error of the network&rsquo;s output vector, compared to the desired output vector for the input vector. Learning is represented as synaptic weight changes correlated with a descent along the error dimension in the space (Churchland and Sejnowski 1992). Representations (concepts) can be portrayed as partitions in multi-dimensional vector spaces. One example is a neuron activation vector space. See Figure 3 . A graph of such a space contains one dimension for the activation value of each neuron in the network (or some specific subset of the network&rsquo;s neurons, such as those in a specific layer). A point in this space represents one possible pattern of activity in all neurons in the network. Activity patterns generated by input vectors that the network has learned to group together will cluster around a (hyper-) point or subvolume in the activity vector space. Any input pattern sufficiently similar to this group will produce an activity pattern lying in geometrical proximity to this point or subvolume. Paul Churchland (1989) argued that this interpretation of network activity provided a quantitative, neurally-inspired basis for prototype theories of concepts developed in late-twentieth century cognitive psychology. Figure 3. Using this theoretical development, and in the realm of neurophilosophy, Paul Churchland (1987, 1989) offered a novel, neuroscientifically-inspired argument for EM. According to the interpretation of neural networks just sketched, activity vectors are the central kind of representations, and vector-to-vector transformations are the central kind of computations, in the brain. This contrasts sharply with the propositional representations and logical/semantic computations postulated by folk psychology. Vectorial content, an ordered sequence of real numbers, is unfamiliar and alien to common sense. This cross-theoretic conceptual difference is at least as great as