--> The Medieval Problem of Universals (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy) Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Menu Browse Table of Contents What's New Random Entry Chronological Archives About Editorial Information About the SEP Editorial Board How to Cite the SEP Special Characters Advanced Tools Contact Support SEP Support the SEP PDFs for SEP Friends Make a Donation SEPIA for Libraries Entry Navigation Entry Contents Bibliography Academic Tools Friends PDF Preview Author and Citation Info Back to Top The Medieval Problem of Universals First published Sun Sep 10, 2000; substantive revision Sun Feb 27, 2022 &ldquo;The problem of universals&rdquo; in general is a historically variable bundle of several closely related, yet in different conceptual frameworks rather differently articulated metaphysical, logical, and epistemological questions, ultimately all connected to the issue of how universal cognition of singular things is possible. How do we know, for example, that the Pythagorean theorem holds universally , for all possible right triangles? Indeed, how can we have any awareness of a potential infinity of all possible right triangles, given that we could only see a finite number of actual ones? How can we universally indicate all possible right triangles with the phrase &lsquo;right triangle&rsquo;? Is there something common to them all signified by this phrase? If so, what is it, and how is it related to the particular right triangles? The medieval problem of universals is a logical, and historical, continuation of the ancient problem generated by Plato&rsquo;s (428&ndash;348 B.C.E.) theory answering such a bundle of questions, namely, his theory of Ideas or Forms. 1. Introduction 2. The Emergence of the Problem 3. The Origin of the Specifically Medieval Problem of Universals 4. Boethius&rsquo; Aristotelian Solution 5. Platonic Forms as Divine Ideas Divine Ideas and Divine Simplicity Illuminationism vs. Abstractionism 6. Universals According to Abelard&rsquo;s Aristotelian Conception 7. Universal Natures in Singular Beings and in Singular Minds 8. Universals in the Via Antiqua 9. Universals in the Via Moderna 10. The Separation of the Viae , and the Breakdown of Scholastic Discourse in Late-Medieval Philosophy Bibliography Primary Literature Secondary Literature Academic Tools Other Internet Resources Related Entries 1. Introduction The inherent problems with Plato&rsquo;s original theory were recognized already by Plato himself. In his Parmenides Plato famously raised several difficulties, for which he apparently did not provide satisfactory answers. Aristotle (384&ndash;322 B.C.E.), with all due reverence to his teacher, consistently rejected Plato&rsquo;s theory, and heavily criticized it throughout his own work. (Hence the famous saying, amicus Plato sed magis amica veritas ). [ 1 ] Nevertheless, despite this explicit doctrinal conflict, Neo-Platonic philosophers, pagans (such as Plotinus ca. 204&ndash;270, and Porphyry, ca. 234&ndash;305) and Christians (such as Augustine, 354&ndash;430, and Boethius, ca. 480&ndash;524) alike, observed a basic concordance between Plato&rsquo;s and Aristotle&rsquo;s approach, crediting Aristotle with an explanation of how the human mind acquires its universal concepts of particular things from experience, and Plato with providing an explanation of how the universal features of particular things are established by being modeled after their universal archetypes. [ 2 ] In any case, it was this general attitude toward the problem in late antiquity that set the stage for the ever more sophisticated medieval discussions. [ 3 ] In these discussions, the concepts of the human mind, therefore, were regarded as posterior to the particular things represented by these concepts, and hence they were referred to as universalia post rem (&lsquo;universals after the thing&rsquo;). The universal features of singular things, inherent in these things themselves, were referred to as universalia in re (&lsquo;universals in the thing&rsquo;), answering the universal exemplars in the divine mind, the universalia ante rem (&lsquo;universals before the thing&rsquo;). [ 4 ] All these, universal concepts, universal features of singular things, and their exemplars, are expressed and signified by means of some obviously universal signs, the universal (or common) terms of human languages. For example, the term &lsquo;man&rsquo;, in English is a universal term, because it is truly predicable of all men in one and the same sense, as opposed to the singular term &lsquo;Socrates&rsquo;, which in the same sense, i.e., when not used equivocally, is only predicable of one man (hence the need to add an ordinal number to the names of kings and popes of the same name). Depending on which of these items (universal features of singular things, their universal concepts, or their universal names) they regarded as the primary, really existing universals, it is customary to classify medieval authors as being realists , conceptualists , or nominalists , respectively. The realists are supposed to be those who assert the existence of real universals in and/or before particular things, the conceptualists those who allow universals only, or primarily, as concepts of the mind, whereas nominalists would be those who would acknowledge only, or primarily, universal words. But this rather crude classification does not adequately reflect the genuine, much more subtle differences of opinion between medieval thinkers. (No wonder one often finds in the secondary literature distinctions between, &ldquo;moderate&rdquo; and &ldquo;extreme&rdquo; versions of these crudely defined positions.) In the first place, nearly all medieval thinkers agreed on the existence of universals before things in the form of divine ideas existing in the divine mind, [ 5 ] but all of them denied their existence in the form of mind-independent, real, eternal entities originally posited by Plato. Furthermore, medieval thinkers also agreed that particular things have certain features which the human mind is able to comprehend in a universal fashion, and signify by means of universal terms. As we shall see, their disagreements rather concerned the types of the relationships that hold between the particular things, their individual, yet universally comprehensible features, the universal concepts of the mind, and the universal terms of our languages, as well as the ontological status of, and distinctions between, the individualized features of the things and the universal concepts of the mind. Nevertheless, the distinction between &ldquo;realism&rdquo; and &ldquo;nominalism&rdquo;, especially, when it is used to refer to the distinction between the radically different ways of doing philosophy and theology in late-medieval times, is quite justifiable, provided we clarify what really separated these ways, as I hope to do in the later sections of this article. In this brief summary account, I will survey the problem both from a systematic and from a historical point of view. In the next section I will first motivate the problem by showing how naturally the questions concerning universals emerge if we consider how we come to know a universal claim, i.e., one that concerns a potentially infinite number of particulars of a given kind, in a simple geometrical demonstration. I will also briefly indicate why a na&iuml;ve Platonic answer to these questions in terms of the theory of perfect Forms, however plausible it may seem at first, is inadequate. In the third section, I will briefly discuss how the specific medieval questions concerning universals emerged, especially in the context of answering Porphyry&rsquo;s famous questions in his introduction to Aristotle&rsquo;s Categories , which will naturally lead us to a discussion of Boethius&rsquo; Aristotelian answers to these questions in his second commentary on Porphyry in the fourth section. However, Boethius&rsquo; Aristotelian answers anticipated only one side of the medieval discussions: the mundane, philosophical theory of universals, in terms of Aristotelian abstractionism. But the other important, Neo-Platonic, theological side of the issue provided by Boethius, and, most importantly, by St. Augustine, was for medieval thinkers the theory of ontologically primary universals as the creative archetypes of the divine mind, the Divine Ideas. Therefore, the fifth section is going to deal with the main ontological and epistemological problems generated by this theory, namely, the apparent conflict between divine simplicity and the multiplicity of divine ideas, on the one hand, and the tension between the Augustinian theory of divine illumination and Aristotelian abstractionism, on the other. Some details of the early medieval Boethian-Aristotelian approach to the problem and its combination with the Neo-Platonic Augustinian tradition before the influx of the newly recovered logical, metaphysical, and physical writings of Aristotle and their Arabic commentaries in the second half of the 12 th century will be taken up in the sixth section, in connection with Abelard&rsquo;s (1079&ndash;1142) discussion of Porphyry&rsquo;s questions. The seventh section will discuss some details of the characteristic metaphysical approach to the problem in the 13 th century, especially as it was shaped by the influence of Avicenna&rsquo;s (980&ndash;1037) doctrine of common nature. The eighth section outlines the most general features of the logical conceptual framework that served as the common background for the metaphysical disagreements among the authors of this period. I will argue that it is precisely this common logical-semantical framework that allows the grouping together of authors who endorse sometimes radically different metaphysics and epistemologies (not only in this period, but also much later, well into the early modern period) as belonging to what in later medieval philosophy came to be known as the &ldquo;realist&rdquo; via antiqua , the &ldquo;old way&rdquo; of doing philosophy and theology. By contrast, it was precisely the radically different logical-semantical approach initiated by William Ockham (ca. 1280&ndash;1350), and articulated and systematized most powerfully by Jean Buridan (ca. 1300&ndash;1358), that distinguished the &ldquo;nominalist&rdquo; via moderna , the &ldquo;modern way&rdquo; of doing philosophy and theology from the second half of the 14 th century. The general, distinctive characteristics of this &ldquo;modern way&rdquo; will be the discussed in the ninth section. Finally, the concluding tenth section will briefly indicate how the separation of the two viae , in addition to a number of extrinsic social factors, contributed to the disintegration of scholastic discourse, and thereby to the disappearance of the characteristically medieval problem of universals, as well as to the re-mergence of recognizably the same problem in different guises in early modern philosophy. 2. The Emergence of the Problem It is easy to see how the problem of universals emerges, if we consider a geometrical demonstration, for example, the demonstration of Thales&rsquo; theorem. According to the theorem, any triangle inscribed in a semicircle is a right triangle, as is shown in the following diagram: Figure 1. Thales&rsquo; theorem Looking at this diagram, we can see that all we need to prove is that the angle at vertex D of triangle ABD is a right angle. The proof is easy once we realize that since lines AC, DC, and BC are the radii of a circle, the triangles ACD and DCB are isosceles triangles, whence their base angles are equal. For then, if we denote the angles of ABD by the names of their vertices, this fact entails that D=A + B; and so, since A + B + D=180 o , it follows that 2A + 2B=180 o ; therefore, A + B=90 o , that is, D=90 o , q. e. d. Of course, from our point of view, the important thing about this demonstration is not so much the truth of its conclusion as the way it proves this conclusion. For the conclusion is a universal theorem, which has to concern all possible triangles inscribed in any possible semicircle whatsoever, not just the one inscribed in the semicircle in the figure above. Yet, apparently, in the demonstration above we were talking only about that triangle. So, how can we claim that whatever we managed to prove concerning that particular triangle will hold for all possible triangles? If we take a closer look at the diagram, we can easily see the appeal of the Platonic answer to this question. For upon a closer look, it is clear that, despite appearances to the contrary, this demonstration cannot be about the triangle in this diagram. Indeed, in the demonstration we assumed that the lines AC, DC, and BC were all perfectly equal, straight lines. However, if we zoom in on the figure, we can clearly see that these lines are far from being equal; in fact, they are not even straight lines: Figure 2. The result of zooming in on Figure 1. The demonstration was certainly not about the collection of jagged black surfaces that we can see here. Rather, the demonstration concerned something we did not see with our bodily eyes, but what we had in mind all along, understanding it to be a triangle, with perfectly straight edges, touching a perfect circle in three unextended points, which are all perfectly equidistant from the center of the circle. The figure we could see was only a convenient &ldquo;reminder&rdquo; of what we are supposed to have in mind when we want to prove that a certain property, namely, that it is a right triangle, has to belong to the object in our mind in virtue of what it is, namely, a triangle inscribed in a semicircle. Obviously, the conclusion applies perfectly only to the perfect triangle we had in mind, whereas it holds for the visible figure only insofar as, and to the extent that, this figure resembles the object we had in mind. But this figure fails to have this property precisely insofar as, and to the extent that, it falls short of the object in our mind. However, on the basis of this point it should also be clear that the conclusion does apply to this figure, and every other visible triangle inscribed in a semicircle as well, insofar as, and to the extent that, it manages to imitate the properties of the perfect object in our mind. Therefore, the Platonic answer to the question of what this demonstration was about, namely, that it was about a perfect, ideal triangle, which is invisible to the eyes, but is graspable by our understanding, at once provides us with an explanation of the possibility of universal, necessary knowledge. By knowing the properties of the Form or Idea, we know all its particulars, i.e., all the things that imitate it, insofar as they imitate or participate in it. So, the Form itself is a universal entity, a universal model of all its particulars; and since it is the knowledge of this universal entity that can enable us to know at once all its particulars, it is absolutely vital for us to know what it is, what it is like , and exactly how it is related to its particulars. However, obviously, all these questions presuppose that it is at all, namely, that such a universal entity exists . But the existence of such an entity seems to be rather precarious. Consider, for instance, the perfect triangle we were supposed to have in mind during the demonstration of Thales&rsquo; theorem. If it is a perfect triangle, it obviously has to have three sides, since a perfect triangle has to be a triangle, and nothing can be a triangle unless it has three sides. But of those three sides either at least two are equal or none, that is to say, the triangle in question has to be either isosceles or scalene (taking &lsquo;isosceles&rsquo; broadly, including even equilateral triangles, for the sake of simplicity). However, since it is supposed to be the universal model of all triangles, and not only of isosceles triangles, this perfect triangle cannot be an isosceles, and for the same reason it cannot be a scalene triangle either. Therefore, such a universal triangle would have to have inconsistent properties, namely, both that it is either isosceles or scalene and that it is neither isosceles nor scalene. However, obviously nothing can have these properties at the same time, so nothing can be a universal triangle any more than a round square. So, apparently, no universal triangle can exist. But then, what was our demonstration about? Just a little while ago, we concluded that it could not be directly about any particular triangle (for it was not about the triangle in the figure, and it was even less about any other particular triangle not in the figure), and now we had to conclude that it could not be about a universal triangle either. But are there any further alternatives? It seems obvious that through this demonstration we do gain universal knowledge concerning all particulars. Yet it is also clear that we do not, indeed, we cannot gain this knowledge by examining all particulars, both because they are potentially infinite and because none of them perfectly satisfies the conditions stated in the demonstration. So, there must have been something wrong in our characterization of the universal, which compelled us to conclude that, in accordance with that characterization, universals could not exist. Therefore, we are left with a whole bundle of questions concerning the nature and characteristics of universals, questions that cannot be left unanswered if we want to know how universal, necessary knowledge is possible, if at all. 3. The Origin of the Specifically Medieval Problem of Universals What we may justifiably call the first formulation of &ldquo;the medieval problem of universals&rdquo; (distinguishing it from the both logically and historically related ancient problems of Plato&rsquo;s Theory of Forms) was precisely such a bundle of questions famously raised by Porphyry in his Isagoge , that is, his Introduction to Aristotle&rsquo;s Categories . As he wrote: (1) Since, Chrysaorius, to teach about Aristotle&rsquo;s Categories it is necessary to know what genus and difference are, as well as species, property, and accident, and since reflection on these things is useful for giving definitions, and in general for matters pertaining to division and demonstration, therefore I shall give you a brief account and shall try in a few words, as in the manner of an introduction, to go over what our elders said about these things. I shall abstain from deeper enquiries and aim, as appropriate, at the simpler ones. (2) For example, I shall beg off saying anything about (a) whether genera and species are real or are situated in bare thoughts alone, (b) whether as real they are bodies or incorporeals, and (c) whether they are separated or in sensibles and have their reality in connection with them. Such business is profound, and requires another, greater investigation. Instead I shall now try to show how the ancients, the Peripatetics among them most of all, interpreted genus and species and the other matters before us in a more logical fashion. [Porphyry, Isagoge , in Spade 1994 (henceforth, Five Texts ), p. 1.] Even though in this way, by relegating them to a &ldquo;greater investigation&rdquo;, Porphyry left these questions unanswered, they certainly proved to be irresistible for his medieval Latin commentators, beginning with Boethius, who produced not just one, but two commentaries on Porphyry&rsquo;s text; the first based on Marius Victorinus&rsquo;s ( fl . 4 th c.) translation, and the second on his own. [ 6 ] In the course of his argument, Boethius makes it quite clear what sort of entity a universal would have to be. A universal must be common to several particulars in its entirety, and not only in part simultaneously, and not in a temporal succession, and it should constitute the substance of its particulars. [ 7 ] However, as Boethius argues, nothing in real existence can satisfy these conditions. The main points of his argument can be reconstructed as follows. Anything that is common to many things in the required manner has to be simultaneously, and as a whole, in the substance of these many things. But these many things are several beings precisely because they are distinct from one another in their being, that is to say, the act of being of one is distinct from the act of being of the other. However, if the universal constitutes the substance of a particular, then it has to have the same act of being as the particular, because constituting the substance of something means precisely this, namely, sharing the act of being of the thing in question, as the thing&rsquo;s substantial part. But the universal is supposed to constitute the substance of all of its distinct particulars, as a whole, at the same time. Therefore, the one act of being of the universal entity would have to be identical with all the distinct acts of being of its several particulars at the same time, which is impossible. [ 8 ] This argument, therefore, establishes that no one thing can be a universal in its being, that is to say, nothing can be both one being and common to many beings in such a manner that it shares its act of being with those many beings, constituting their substance. This can easily be visualized in the following diagram, where the tiny lightning bolts indicate the acts of being of the entities involved, namely, a woman, a man, and their universal humanity (the larger dotted figure). Figure 3. Illustration of the first part of Boethius&rsquo; argument But then, Boethius goes on, we should perhaps say that the universal is not one being, but rather many beings, that is, [the collection of] [ 9 ] those constituents of the individual essences of its particulars on account of which they all fall under the same universal predicable. For example, on this conception, the genus &lsquo;animal&rsquo; would not be some one entity, a universal animality over and above the individual animals, yet somehow sharing its being with them all (since, as we have just seen, that is impossible), but rather [the collection of] the individual animalities of all animals. Boethius rejects this suggestion on the ground that whenever there are several generically similar entities, they have to have a genus; therefore, just as the individual animals had to have a genus, so too, their individual animalities would have to have another one. However, since the genus of animalities cannot be one entity, some &lsquo;super-animality&rsquo; (for the same reason that the genus of animals could not be one entity, on the basis of the previous argument), it seems that the genus of animalities would have to be a number of further &lsquo;super-animalities&rsquo;. But then again, the same line of reasoning should apply to these &lsquo;super-animalities&rsquo;, giving rise to a number of &lsquo;super-super-animalities&rsquo;, and so on to infinity, which is absurd. Therefore, we cannot regard the genus as some real being even in the form of [a collection of] several distinct entities. Since similar reasonings would apply to the other Porphyrian predicables as well, no universal can exist in this way. Now, a universal either exists in reality independently of a mind conceiving of it, or it only exists in the mind. If it exists in reality, then it either has to be one being or several beings. But since it cannot exist in reality in either of these two ways, Boethius concludes that it can only exist in the mind. [ 10 ] However, to complicate matters, it appears that a universal cannot exist in the mind either. For, as Boethius says, the universal existing in the mind is some universal understanding of some thing outside the mind. But then this universal understanding is either disposed in the same way as the thing is, or differently. If it is disposed in the same way, then the thing also must be universal, and then we end up with the previous probl