CS50x 2024 This is CS50x 2024, an older version of the course. See cs50.harvard.edu/x/2025 for the latest! This is CS50 CS50’s Introduction to Computer Science OpenCourseWare Donate David J. Malan malan@harvard.edu Facebook GitHub Instagram LinkedIn Reddit Threads Twitter nav" data-bs-toggle="collapse"> Menu CS50x Puzzle Day 2025 Zoom Meetings new CS50.ai Ed Discussion for Q&amp;A Visual Studio Code CS50 Educator Workshop CS50x Puzzle Day 2024 Gallery of Final Projects 🖼️ What’s new for 2024? Week 0 Scratch Week 1 C Week 2 Arrays Week 3 Algorithms Week 4 Memory Week 5 Data Structures Week 6 Python Week 6.5 Artificial Intelligence Week 7 SQL Week 8 HTML, CSS, JavaScript Week 9 Flask Week 10 Cybersecurity Additional Practice Final Project Gallery of Final Projects 🖼️ Seminars Academic Honesty CS50 Certificate FAQs Gradebook Staff Syllabus Apple TV edX Google TV Harvard Extension School Harvard Summer School Roku new YouTube Manual Pages Style Guide Status Page Communities Bluesky Clubhouse Discord Q&amp;A Ed Q&amp;A Facebook Group Q&amp;A Facebook Page GitHub Gitter Q&amp;A Instagram LinkedIn Group LinkedIn Page Medium Quora Reddit Q&amp;A Slack Q&amp;A Snapchat SoundCloud Stack Exchange Q&amp;A Telegram TikTok Threads X Account X Community YouTube Courses CS50x CS50 AI CS50 Business CS50 Cybersecurity CS50 for Lawyers CS50 Python CS50 R CS50 Scratch CS50 SQL CS50 Web License Welcome This is CS50, Harvard University’s introduction to the intellectual enterprises of computer science and the art of programming, for concentrators and non-concentrators alike, with or without prior programming experience. (Two thirds of CS50 students have never taken CS before.) This course teaches you how to solve problems, both with and without code, with an emphasis on correctness, design, and style. Topics include computational thinking, abstraction, algorithms, data structures, and computer science more generally. Problem sets inspired by the arts, humanities, social sciences, and sciences. More than teach you how to program in one language, this course teaches you how to program fundamentally and how to teach yourself new languages ultimately. The course starts with a traditional but omnipresent language called C that underlies today’s newer languages, via which you’ll learn not only about functions, variables, conditionals, loops, and more, but also about how computers themselves work underneath the hood, memory and all. The course then transitions to Python, a higher-level language that you’ll understand all the more because of C. Toward term’s end, the course introduces SQL, via which you can store data in databases, along with HTML, CSS, and JavaScript, via which you can create web and mobile apps alike. Course culminates in a final project. Watch an introduction How to Take this Course Even if you are not a student at Harvard, you are welcome to “take” this course for free via this OpenCourseWare by working your way through the course’s eleven weeks of material. For each week, follow this workflow: flowchart TD A[Watch Lecture] --&gt; |recommended|B[Watch Section] A --&gt; D B --&gt; |recommended|C[Watch Shorts] B --&gt; D[Submit Problem Set] C --&gt; D And then submit the course’s final project . To submit the course’s problem sets and final project for feedback, be sure to create an edX account , if you haven’t already. Ask questions along the way via any of the course’s communities ! If interested in a verified certificate from edX , enroll at cs50.edx.org instead. If interested in a professional certificate from edX in web development, enroll at cs50.edx.org/programs/web instead. in artificial intelligence, enroll at cs50.edx.org/programs/ai instead. in Python programming, enroll at cs50.edx.org/programs/python instead. If interested in transfer credit and accreditation from Harvard Extension School , register at web.dce.harvard.edu/extension/csci/e/50 instead. If interested in transfer credit and accreditation from Harvard Summer School , register at web.dce.harvard.edu/summer/csci/s/50 instead. How to Teach this Course If you are a teacher, you are welcome to adopt or adapt these materials for your own course, per the license . Additionally, we encourage teachers to participate in the CS50 Educator Workshop to learn more about CS50’s curriculum, technology, and pedagogy.