NNES: National Nuclear Energy Series The National Nuclear Energy Series The National Nuclear Energy Series (NNES) was originally planned in 1945 as a record of the research work done under the Manhattan Project and the Atomic Energy Commission. When completed, the series was expected to consist of one hundred volumes, grouped into ten divisions. Division I --- Electromagnetic Separation Project Division II --- Gaseous Diffusion Project Division III --- Special Separations Project Division IV --- Plutonium Project Division V --- Los Alamos Project Division VI --- University of Rochester Project Division VII --- Materials Procurement Project Division VIII --- Manhattan Project Division IX --- Thermal Diffusion Project Division X --- Centrifuge Project My Story It all started in June of 2000, when I was finishing up my collection of the MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, and my collection of Control Textbooks from the 1940's. I was in Arlington Books (which is no longer in Arlington, but is now on Milk Street in Boston) and I found a copy of "Electronics: Experimental Techniques" by Elmore and Sands for $7. What intrigued me most about the book wasn't the title (or the cost), although I do own quite a few old electrical engineering texts, but was the gold lettering on the spine that said "National Nuclear Energy Series V-1." Hmm, I thought, volume one of what? The title page spelled it out: "National Nuclear Energy Series, Manhattan Project Technical Section, Division V --- Los Alamos Project, Volume 1." Another series of books, published by a World War II research laboratory? I was hooked. However, it has taken some research just to find a list of all the titles in the series. Unlike other McGraw-Hill Series that I have collected (such as the MIT Rad Lab Series, or the McGraw-Hill Electrical and Electronic Engineering Series from the 1940's and 1950's), there was no list of titles printed in each volume. I looked in a couple of library catalogs (such as MIT's) and only found a dozen titles, but numbered I-5, II-16 and IV-19B, so I knew there had to be more, many more, out there. From the webpages of the Brookhaven National Laboratory, I was able to retrieve a list of thirty-seven volumes of the Series from their library catalog. Starting from the list of libraries at the Department of Energy website, I ended up going through the library catalogs at Brookhaven, Los Alamos, Oak Ridge, and Argonne. After all of that, I had a list of fifty volumes. For good measure, I also went through the other libraries listed on the DOE page, including Sandia, Lawrence Berkeley, and Lawrence Livermore, but I did not find any additional volume titles. However, in the Argonne Library, I found a reference for technical report TID-5103, entitled "Outline of declassified volumes in the National Nuclear Energy Series" published in 1953. I immediately requested the book via Inter-Library Loan, and during my conversation with the reference librarian, learned about www.osti.gov . There, I found a copy of a technical report entitled "Documents and related materials associated with the contents and the origin of the Los Alamos Technical Series and the National Nuclear Energy Series," by Edward Hammel from 1996. It was mostly about the (still classified) Los Alamo Technical Series, but it did contain an 1977 advertisement from Pergamon Press offering the (unclassfied) NNES volumes on microfilm. After losing my Inter-Library Loan request once, and making me request it again, the library informed me that TID-5103 was not available. However, they did get me a copy of "The National Nuclear Energy Series: An Abridged Compilation" by Orlando-Gay, Brangan, and Wise, all at Sandia National Laboratories (May 1999). This report was exactly what I wanted. The Series All told, there are 62 unclassified volumes, 17 classified volumes, and 21 volumes that were proposed but never written. Of the unclassified volumes, McGraw-Hill published 29 of them (as 35 books) between 1948 and 1956. There are many gaps in the numbering sequence. Most of these "missing" volumes were classified "Secret" at the time (all but one volume of Division II is still classified; other Divisions have been declassified). The other volumes were published as technical reports by the United States Atomic Energy Commission. For more information, see the report by Orlando-Gay, Brangan, and Wise (SAND99-1114). Division I --- Electromagnetic Separation Project Volume I-1 (1949) Author: Guthrie, Andrew and Wakerling, Raymond Kornelious Title: Vacuum equipment and techniques Volume I-5 (1949) Author: Guthrie, Andrew and Wakering, R. K. Title: The characteristics of electrical discharges in magnetic fields Division II --- Gaseous Diffusion Project Volume II-16 (1949) Author: Benedict, Manson and Williams, Clarke. Title: Engineering developments in the gaseous diffusion process Division III --- Special Separations Project Volume III-1B (1951) Author: Cohen, Karl P. Title: The theory of isotope separation as applied to the large-scale production of U235 Volume III-2 (1949) Author: Dieke, Gerhard Heinrich and Duncan, Albert Benjamin Ford Title: Spectroscopic properties of uranium compounds Volume III-4A (1951) Author: Kirshenbaum, Isidor Title: Physical properties and analysis of heavy water Volume III-4C (1949) Author: Alice H. Kimball; edited by Harold C. Urey and Isidor Kirshenbaum. Title: Bibliography of research on heavy hydrogen compounds Volume III-4F (1955) Author: Murphy, George Moseley Title: Production of heavy water Division IV --- Plutonium Project Volume IV-8 (1954) Author: George S. Monk and W. H. McCorkle. Title: Optical instrumentation Volume IV-9 (three books, 1951) Author: Coryell, Charles Du Bois and Sugarman, Nathan Title: Radiochemical studies: the fission products Volume IV-14A (1954) Author: Seaborg, Glenn Theodore and Katz, Joseph J. Title: The actinide elements Volume IV-14B (two books, 1949) Author: Seaborg, Glenn Theodore Title: The transuranium elements ; research papers Volume IV-19B (1950) Author: Quill, Laurence Larkin Title: The chemistry and metallurgy of miscellaneous materials: thermodynamics. Volume IV-20 (1951) Author: Stone, Robert Spencer Title: Industrial medicine on the Plutonium Project ; survey and collected papers. Volume IV-22B (1954) Author: Zirkle, Raymond E. Title: Biological effects of external X and gamma radiation: Part I Volume IV-22E (1951) Author: Zirkle, Raymond E. Title: Biological effects of external beta radiation. Volume IV-22I (1948) Author: William Bloom Title: Histopathology of irradiation from external and internal sources Volume IV-23 (1951) Author: Albert Tannenbaum Title: Toxicology of uranium : survey and collected papers Division V --- Los Alamos Project Volume V-1 (1949) Author: Elmore, William C. and Sands, Matthew L. Title: Electronics: experimental techniques Volume V-2 (1949) Author: Rossi, Bruno Benedetto Title: Ionization chambers and counters: experimental techniques Volume V-3 (1952) Author: Graves, Alvin Cushman and Froman, Darol Kenneth Title: Miscellaneous physical and chemical techniques of the Los Alamos project: experimental techniques Division VI --- University of Rochester Project Volume VI-1 (four parts: two books 1949, and two books 1953) Author: Voegtlin, Carl and Hodge, Harold Carpenter Title: Pharmacology and toxicology of uranium compounds Volume VI-2 (1954) Author: Blair, Henry Alexander Title: Biological effects of external radiation. Volume VI-3 (1950) Author: Robert M. Fink Title: Biological studies with polonium, radium, and plutonium Division VII --- Materials Procurement Project Volume VII-1 (1951) Author: Slesser, Charles and Schram, Stuart R. Title: Preparation, properties, and technology of fluorine and organic fluoro compounds Volume VII-4 (1955) Author: Lustman, Benjamin and Kerze, Frank Title: The metallurgy of zirconium. Division VIII --- Manhattan Project Volume VIII-1 (1950) Author: Rodden, Clement James Title: Analytical chemistry of the Manhattan Project. Volume VIII-5 (1951) Author: Katz, Joseph J. and Rabinowitch, Eugene Title: The chemistry of uranium: The element, its binary and related compounds Volume VIII-8 (1956) Author: Oughterson, Ashley W. and Warren, Shields Title: Medical effects of the atomic bomb in Japan. Errata? Volume IV-19C (1955) Author: Quill, Laurence Larkin Title: The chemistry and metallurgy of miscellaneous materials Volume IV-22C (1956) Author: Zirkle, Raymond E. Title: Biological effects of external X and gamma radiation: Part II The report by Orlando-Gay, Brangan, and Wise lists volumes IV-19C and IV-22C as being published by McGraw-Hill. I have found no evidence that they were. However, volume IV-19B (by the same author with an almost identical title) was published by McGraw-Hill in 1950. Only seven copies of volume IV-19C are listed in WorldCat , and all of them were published by the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission as report TID-5212. (For comparison, there are 283 copies of McGraw-Hill's IV-19B listed in WorldCat.) In the WorldCat listing for Zirkle's "Biological Effects of External X and Gamma Radiation," there is a note that says that part one (IV-22B) was issued in the NNES, but that part two (IV-22C) has the imprint: "Oak Ridge, Tennessee, U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, Technical Information Service Extension." Again, I suspect that volume IV-22C was only ever published as USAEC report TID-5220. This page has been accessed at least times since October 2002. Written July 2000 by Kent Lundberg . Last updated: Wednesday, March 9 2005.