Stellar Explosions - NASA Science Explore Search News &amp; Events News &amp; Events Recently Published Video Series on NASA+ Podcasts &amp; Audio Blogs Newsletters Social Media Media Resources Multimedia Multimedia Images Videos on NASA+ Interactives NASA Apps Podcasts e-Books STEM Multimedia NASA+ Search Suggested Searches Climate Change Artemis Expedition 64 Mars perseverance SpaceX Crew-2 International Space Station View All Topics A-Z Home Missions Humans in Space Earth The Solar System The Universe Science Aeronautics Technology Learning Resources About NASA Español News &amp; Events Multimedia NASA+ Highlights 6 min read Advancing Earth Observation at NASA Since Release of Earthrise Photo article 9 hours ago 5 min read NASA’s Curiosity Finds Organic Molecules Never Seen Before on Mars article 1 day ago 2 min read NASA Wins Two Webby Awards, Five Webby People’s Voice Awards article 1 day ago Back Missions Search All NASA Missions A to Z List of Missions Upcoming Launches and Landings Spaceships and Rockets Communicating with Missions Artemis James Webb Space Telescope Hubble Space Telescope International Space Station OSIRIS-REx Humans in Space Why Go to Space Astronauts Commercial Space Destinations Spaceships and Rockets Living in Space Earth Explore Earth Science Climate Change Earth, Our Planet Earth Science in Action Earth Multimedia Earth Data Earth Science Researchers The Solar System The Sun Mercury Venus Earth The Moon Mars Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Pluto &amp; Dwarf Planets Asteroids, Comets &amp; Meteors The Kuiper Belt The Oort Cloud Skywatching The Universe Exoplanets The Search for Life in the Universe Stars Galaxies Black Holes The Big Bang Dark Matter Dark Energy Science Earth Science Planetary Science Astrophysics &amp; Space Science The Sun &amp; Heliophysics Biological &amp; Physical Sciences Lunar Science Citizen Science Astromaterials Aeronautics Research Human Space Travel Research Aeronautics Science in the Air NASA Aircraft Flight Innovation Supersonic Flight Air Traffic Solutions Green Aviation Tech Drones &amp; You Technology Technology Transfer &amp; Spinoffs Space Travel Technology Technology Living in Space Manufacturing and Materials Robotics Science Instruments Computing Learning Resources For Kids and Students For Educators For Colleges and Universities For Professionals Science for Everyone Requests for Exhibits, Artifacts, or Speakers STEM Engagement at NASA About NASA NASA&#039;s Impacts Centers and Facilities Directorates Organizations People of NASA Careers Internships Our History Doing Business with NASA Get Involved Contact NASA en Español Ciencia Aeronáutica Ciencias Terrestres Sistema Solar Universo News &amp; Events Recently Published Video Series on NASA+ Podcasts &amp; Audio Blogs Newsletters Social Media Media Resources Multimedia Images Videos on NASA+ Interactives NASA Apps Podcasts e-Books STEM Multimedia Highlights 5 min read NASA’s Curiosity Finds Organic Molecules Never Seen Before on Mars article 1 day ago 5 min read NASA on Track for Future Missions with Initial Artemis II Assessments article 2 days ago 6 min read NASA’s Hubble Dazzles With Young Stars in Trifid Nebula article 2 days ago Highlights 5 min read Artemis II Mission Milestones: An Image and Video Recap article 21 hours ago 12 min read NASA Answers Your Most Pressing Artemis II Questions article 3 weeks ago 1 min read Artemis II Podcast Series article 4 weeks ago Highlights 3 min read NASA’s 777 Aircraft Returns Home with Science Flights on the Horizon article 3 hours ago 1 min read Earth Day 2026: Posters and Virtual Backgrounds article 9 hours ago 6 min read Advancing Earth Observation at NASA Since Release of Earthrise Photo article 9 hours ago Highlights 5 min read NASA’s Curiosity Finds Organic Molecules Never Seen Before on Mars article 1 day ago 1 min read Amendment 51: C.6 Development and Advancement of Lunar Instrumentation Not Solicited in ROSES-25 article 1 week ago 3 min read Twin NASA Control Rooms Support Artemis Safety, Success article 2 weeks ago Highlights 6 min read NASA’s Hubble Dazzles With Young Stars in Trifid Nebula article 2 days ago 6 min read ‘Interstellar Glaciers’: NASA’s SPHEREx Maps Vast Galactic Ice Regions article 1 week ago 5 min read NASA Finds Young Stars Dim in X-rays Surprisingly Quickly article 1 week ago Highlights 3 min read NASA’s 777 Aircraft Returns Home with Science Flights on the Horizon article 3 hours ago 1 min read Integrated Modeling Virtual Institute (IMVI) article 6 hours ago 1 min read Early Career Investigator Program – Earth Science (ROSES A.11) article 7 hours ago Highlights 4 min read NASA, Organ Sharing Network UNOS to Study Faster Organ Transport article 1 day ago 1 min read 2025-2026 Dream with Us Design Challenge Winners article 1 week ago 1 min read Indoor Testing Facilities available at the NASA Unmanned Autonomy Research Complex (NUARC) article 2 weeks ago Highlights 5 min read NASA’s Curiosity Finds Organic Molecules Never Seen Before on Mars article 1 day ago 1 min read Amendment 51: C.6 Development and Advancement of Lunar Instrumentation Not Solicited in ROSES-25 article 1 week ago 2 min read Snow in the Shadow of the Andes article 2 weeks ago Highlights 1 min read Join the Artemis Mission to the Moon article 5 months ago Highlights 4 min read NASA, Organ Sharing Network UNOS to Study Faster Organ Transport article 1 day ago 2 min read NASA Wins Two Webby Awards, Five Webby People’s Voice Awards article 1 day ago 6 min read Advancing Earth Observation at NASA Since Release of Earthrise Photo article 9 hours ago Highlights 11 min read La NASA anuncia la cobertura de la misión lunar Artemis II article 4 weeks ago 15 min read Agenda diaria de la misión a la Luna de Artemis II de la NASA article 1 month ago 6 min read La NASA refuerza Artemis: añade una misión y perfecciona su arquitectura general article 2 months ago Explore Hubble &hellip; Science Behind the Discoveries Stellar Explosions Hubble Home Overview About Hubble The History of Hubble Hubble Timeline Why Have a Telescope in Space? Hubble by the Numbers At the Museum FAQs Impact &amp; Benefits Hubble's Impact &amp; Benefits Science Impacts Cultural Impact Technology Benefits Impact on Human Spaceflight Astro Community Impacts Science Hubble Science Science Themes Science Highlights Science Behind Discoveries Universe Uncovered Hubble's Partners in Science Hubble &amp; Citizen Science AI &amp; Hubble Science Explore the Night Sky Observatory Hubble Observatory Hubble Design Mission Operations Science Operations Astronaut Missions to Hubble Hubble vs Webb Team Hubble Team Career Aspirations Hubble Astronauts Multimedia Images Videos Online Activities e-Books Sonifications Podcasts 3D Hubble Models Lithographs Fact Sheets Posters Hubble on the NASA App Glossary News Hubble News Social Media Media Resources 35th Anniversary More Online Activities &nbsp; Stellar Explosions Stellar outbursts are a critical part of the universe's ecosystem. In 185 A.D., Chinese astronomers noted a “guest star” that appeared in the sky and remained there for eight months. The strange star was perhaps the earliest recorded supernova observation, but humans have been witnessing stellar explosions for as long as they’ve looked to the skies.&nbsp; Long ago, the sudden, temporary brightening of a point of light in the sky made people think that they were seeing new stars. Today we still call these events “novae,” from the Latin word meaning new ― though we know now that what we’re actually seeing is a flood of light unleashed by a star’s outburst. While stellar explosions are most closely associated with star death, they can occur during a star’s lifetime as well. Hubble observations have played a key role in identifying and characterizing these explosive events. The Crab Nebula is a six-light-year-wide expanding remnant of a star's supernova explosion. Japanese and Chinese astronomers recorded this violent event nearly 1,000 years ago in 1054, as did, almost certainly, Native Americans. The orange filaments are the tattered remains of the star and consist mostly of hydrogen. The rapidly spinning neutron star embedded in the center of the nebula is the dynamo powering the nebula's eerie interior bluish glow. The blue light comes from electrons whirling at nearly the speed of light around magnetic field lines from the neutron star. The colors in the image indicate the different elements that were expelled during the explosion. Blue in the filaments in the outer part of the nebula represents neutral oxygen, green is singly-ionized sulfur, and red indicates doubly-ionized oxygen. NASA, ESA, J. Hester and A. Loll (Arizona State University) Novae A nova is a relatively mild stellar explosion in which the surface of a white dwarf star ― the dead remnant of a low-mass star like the Sun ― explodes and throws off moderate amounts of material without destroying the remnant itself. Novae occur in binary star systems, where the relatively dense and massive white dwarf gravitationally pulls hydrogen gas from the outer atmosphere of a large companion star. This material orbits in a disk around the white dwarf and accretes onto its surface in a thin layer. When the dwarf collects a mile-deep (1.6 km) surface layer of hydrogen, heating from the dwarf ignites fusion ― the process of fusing atoms together ― in that layer, igniting a runaway explosion that releases energy as radiation that we can detect on Earth. Novae typically appear about 200,000 times brighter than the Sun, but can be up to 2 million times brighter. Because material is continually siphoned from the companion star to the white dwarf, surface explosions can happen repeatedly. Classical novae occur infrequently, taking thousands or even millions of years for enough material to accumulate. Recurrent novae, on the other hand, erupt on a timescale of decades to centuries. Hubble observed the light emitted by the close binary star system T Pyxidis, or T Pyx, a recurrent nova, during an outburst in April 2011. Astronomers were surprised to find that the ejecta from the white dwarf’s earlier outbursts stayed in the vicinity of the star and formed a disk of debris around the nova. The white ovals in each image highlight the disk areas being illuminated by the light of the nova. T Pyx erupts every 12 to 50 years. NASA, ESA, A. Crotts, J. Sokoloski, and H. Uthas (Columbia University), and S. Lawrence (Hofstra University) Kilonovae Roughly a thousand times brighter than novae, kilonovae are stellar explosions that occur when two neutron stars or one neutron star and one black hole merge. Hubble provided the first definitive evidence of a kilonova in 2013 and direct observations of one in 2017. Kilonovae take place in compact binary systems or when two independent objects happen to come close enough to get caught in each other’s orbit. As the two objects orbit each other, they emit gravitational waves, or ripples in space-time, that cause the objects to lose angular momentum. Their orbit shrinks and the objects get closer together until they eventually merge. On August 17, 2017, the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory detected gravitational waves from a neutron star collision. Within 12 hours, observatories had identified the source of the event within the galaxy NGC 4993, shown in this Hubble Space Telescope image, and located an associated stellar flare called a kilonova. Hubble observed that flare of the kilonova’s light fade over the course of six days, as shown in these observations taken on August 22, 26, and 28 (insets). NASA and ESA Acknowledgment: A. Levan (U. Warwick), N. Tanvir (U. Leicester), and A. Fruchter and O. Fox (STScI) This animation shows two merging neutron stars in the galaxy NGC 4993. As the stars collide, some of the debris blasts away in particle jets moving at nearly the speed of light. A hot, dense, expanding cloud of debris, stripped from the neutron stars just before they collided, forges heavy elements like gold and platinum. In the aftermath of the merger, the jets continue to expand into space. Detailed observations by Hubble and other telescopes all over the world confirmed that this object, initially detected by the Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope, was a kilonova. Credit: NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center/CI Lab; Music: “Exploding Skies” from Killer Tracks When the two objects grow near, the gravitational force that one object exerts can be large enough to overcome the gravity holding the other object together, unbinding some of the material. The collision itself is violent enough that it ejects some material outward at roughly one-tenth the speed of light, turning the particles into cosmic rays. The hot, dense, and neutron-rich material destabilizes and undergoes fusion. The presence of so many neutrons (from the neutron star) allows atoms to fuse to the heaviest elements like gold and platinum. Supernovae A supernova is an end-of-life explosion of a star, billions of times as bright as the Sun. It’s a one-time event that destroys the star. Large amounts of material form new elements as they undergo fusion and are flung into space, where they are recycled as the building blocks of new stars. Supernovae are quite rare. In a galaxy like our Milky Way, only a few may occur every century. There are two types of supernovae: Type 1a and core-collapse. Supernova 1987A is a Type 1a supernova that was discovered in 1987. Hubble began observing it in the early 1990s. This image, taken in 2017, shows the bright inner ring around the central region of the exploded star, composed of material ejected by the star about 20,000 years before its demise. The supernova looks like a trio of rings from our perspective but is actually hourglass-shaped. Hydrogen clouds surrounding the supernova are fueling new star birth. Image: NASA, ESA, Robert Kirshner (CfA, Moore Foundation), Max Mutchler (STScI), Roberto Avila (STScI) Type Ia Supernovae Astronomers think a Type Ia supernova, also known as a thermonuclear supernova, occurs in binary systems where at least one white dwarf ― the dense core of what was once a Sun-like star ― is paired with a companion star. As with a nova, the white dwarf siphons material gravitationally from its companion star. As the white dwarf collects mass, its temperature rises. But in these cases, the white dwarf accumulates too much mass ― more than 1.4 times the mass of the Sun (a value called the Chandrashekar limit). When it passes the limit, its temperature becomes intense enough to fuse heavier elements and the white dwarf reignites, exploding spectacularly. The same type of supernova can occur in systems that contain two white dwarf stars that are drawn into a collision by gravity. Hubble observations of Supernova 1987A from the early 1990s onward captured changes to the inner ring of gas around the destructed star and revealed details about the supernova’s explosion geometry. The bright, bead-like objects are knots in a dense ring of gas that pre-existed the supernova explosion, which brighten over time as the supernova’s shock wave crashes into and energizes the ring. Image: NASA, ESA, Robert Kirshner (CfA, Moore Foundation), Peter Challis (CfA) This annotated Hubble image of spiral galaxy NGC 3810 highlights the location of a Type Ia supernova designated SN 2022zut. ESA/Hubble &amp; NASA, D. Sand, R. J. Foley These rare supernovae happen in the Milky Way galaxy every roughly 500 years. Since Type Ia supernovae release the same amount of energy every time, astronomers use them as “standard candles” to determine distance . By comparing how bright Type 1a supernovae appear to how bright they actually are ― similar to judging the distance to oncoming headlights by their brightness ― researchers can determine the distances to faraway galaxies where these supernovae appear. Core-collapse Supernovae A core-collapse supernova occurs at the death of a high-mass star, driven by the star’s collapsing core. When a star runs out of fuel in its core, the fusion that generates an outward pressure stops. If the star is more than eight times the mass of the Sun, the force of gravity overpowers the star’s radiation pressure and collapses the core inward. These supernovae are known as types Ib, Ic, or II, depending on which elements are present. A Type II supernova is thought to have caused this supernova blast wave known as the Cygnus Loop. Located around 2,400 light-years away, the Cygnus Loop is positioned in the northern constellation of Cygnus, where it covers an area 36 times larger than the full moon. The original supernova explosion blasted apart a dying star about 20 times more massive than our Sun between 10,000 and 20,000 years ago. Since then, the remnant has expanded 60 light-years from its center. The interaction of the ejected material and the low-density interstellar material swept up by the shockwave forms the distinctive veil-like structure seen in this image. This Hubble image captures only a small portion of the loop. ESA/Hubble &amp; NASA, W. Blair; Acknowledgement: Leo Shatz As atoms in the star’s collapsing core get crushed together, the temperature rises. The compressed core recoils, bouncing back outward. The energy of the recoil hits the outer layers of the star very quickly, driving a shockwave that heats the material, fuses the outer layers to produce new elements, and violently ejects the material into the cosmos. The core can stabilize as a neutron star — so called because the high pressure forces protons and electrons to fuse into neutrons — or it can further collapse into a black hole if the remaining mass is more than three times that of the Sun. Stellar explosions are dramatic, observable demonstrations of the volatile life of a star ― brief, bright glimpses into the immense forces roiling in a star’s depths. By witnessing and monitoring these outbursts, astronomers are able to better understand how stars form, evolve, and eventually die ― and how by blasting their contents into space, stars seed the cosmos with material that gives rise to new stars. Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From Hubble Hubble Focus: The Lives of Stars This e-book highlights the mission’s recent discoveries and observations related to the birth, evolution, and death of stars. Universe Uncovered Hubble&#8217;s Stellar Construction Zones Hubble Images National Aeronautics and Space Administration NASA explores the unknown in air and space, innovates for the benefit of humanity, and inspires the world through discovery. About NASA&#039;s Mission Join Us Home News &amp; Events Multimedia NASA+ Missions Humans in Space Earth The Solar System The Universe Science Aeronautics Technology Learning Resources About NASA NASA en Español Follow NASA More NASA Social Accounts NASA Newsletters Sitemap For Media Privacy Policy FOIA No FEAR Act Office of the IG Budget &amp; Annual Reports Agency Financial Reports Contact NASA Accessibility Page Last Updated: Mar 11, 2026 Page Editor: Andrea Gianopoulos Responsible NASA Official for Science: Diana Logreira &#916; Did you find what you were looking for? (Required) Yes No Partly What were you looking for? (Required) What were you hoping to accomplish by visiting our website? (Required) ×