Building Blocks - NASA Science Explore Search News &amp; Events News &amp; Events Recently Published Video Series on NASA+ Podcasts &amp; Audio Blogs Newsletters Social Media Media Resources Multimedia Multimedia Images Videos on NASA+ Interactives NASA Apps Podcasts e-Books STEM Multimedia NASA+ Search Suggested Searches Climate Change Artemis Expedition 64 Mars perseverance SpaceX Crew-2 International Space Station View All Topics A-Z Home Missions Humans in Space Earth The Solar System The Universe Science Aeronautics Technology Learning Resources About NASA Español News &amp; Events Multimedia NASA+ Highlights 6 min read Advancing Earth Observation at NASA Since Release of Earthrise Photo article 9 hours ago 5 min read NASA’s Curiosity Finds Organic Molecules Never Seen Before on Mars article 1 day ago 2 min read NASA Wins Two Webby Awards, Five Webby People’s Voice Awards article 1 day ago Back Missions Search All NASA Missions A to Z List of Missions Upcoming Launches and Landings Spaceships and Rockets Communicating with Missions Artemis James Webb Space Telescope Hubble Space Telescope International Space Station OSIRIS-REx Humans in Space Why Go to Space Astronauts Commercial Space Destinations Spaceships and Rockets Living in Space Earth Explore Earth Science Climate Change Earth, Our Planet Earth Science in Action Earth Multimedia Earth Data Earth Science Researchers The Solar System The Sun Mercury Venus Earth The Moon Mars Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Pluto &amp; Dwarf Planets Asteroids, Comets &amp; Meteors The Kuiper Belt The Oort Cloud Skywatching The Universe Exoplanets The Search for Life in the Universe Stars Galaxies Black Holes The Big Bang Dark Matter Dark Energy Science Earth Science Planetary Science Astrophysics &amp; Space Science The Sun &amp; Heliophysics Biological &amp; Physical Sciences Lunar Science Citizen Science Astromaterials Aeronautics Research Human Space Travel Research Aeronautics Science in the Air NASA Aircraft Flight Innovation Supersonic Flight Air Traffic Solutions Green Aviation Tech Drones &amp; You Technology Technology Transfer &amp; Spinoffs Space Travel Technology Technology Living in Space Manufacturing and Materials Robotics Science Instruments Computing Learning Resources For Kids and Students For Educators For Colleges and Universities For Professionals Science for Everyone Requests for Exhibits, Artifacts, or Speakers STEM Engagement at NASA About NASA NASA&#039;s Impacts Centers and Facilities Directorates Organizations People of NASA Careers Internships Our History Doing Business with NASA Get Involved Contact NASA en Español Ciencia Aeronáutica Ciencias Terrestres Sistema Solar Universo News &amp; Events Recently Published Video Series on NASA+ Podcasts &amp; Audio Blogs Newsletters Social Media Media Resources Multimedia Images Videos on NASA+ Interactives NASA Apps Podcasts e-Books STEM Multimedia Highlights 5 min read NASA’s Curiosity Finds Organic Molecules Never Seen Before on Mars article 1 day ago 5 min read NASA on Track for Future Missions with Initial Artemis II Assessments article 2 days ago 6 min read NASA’s Hubble Dazzles With Young Stars in Trifid Nebula article 2 days ago Highlights 5 min read Artemis II Mission Milestones: An Image and Video Recap article 21 hours ago 12 min read NASA Answers Your Most Pressing Artemis II Questions article 3 weeks ago 1 min read Artemis II Podcast Series article 4 weeks ago Highlights 3 min read NASA’s 777 Aircraft Returns Home with Science Flights on the Horizon article 3 hours ago 1 min read Earth Day 2026: Posters and Virtual Backgrounds article 9 hours ago 6 min read Advancing Earth Observation at NASA Since Release of Earthrise Photo article 9 hours ago Highlights 5 min read NASA’s Curiosity Finds Organic Molecules Never Seen Before on Mars article 1 day ago 1 min read Amendment 51: C.6 Development and Advancement of Lunar Instrumentation Not Solicited in ROSES-25 article 1 week ago 3 min read Twin NASA Control Rooms Support Artemis Safety, Success article 2 weeks ago Highlights 6 min read NASA’s Hubble Dazzles With Young Stars in Trifid Nebula article 2 days ago 6 min read ‘Interstellar Glaciers’: NASA’s SPHEREx Maps Vast Galactic Ice Regions article 1 week ago 5 min read NASA Finds Young Stars Dim in X-rays Surprisingly Quickly article 1 week ago Highlights 3 min read NASA’s 777 Aircraft Returns Home with Science Flights on the Horizon article 3 hours ago 1 min read Integrated Modeling Virtual Institute (IMVI) article 6 hours ago 1 min read Early Career Investigator Program – Earth Science (ROSES A.11) article 7 hours ago Highlights 4 min read NASA, Organ Sharing Network UNOS to Study Faster Organ Transport article 1 day ago 1 min read 2025-2026 Dream with Us Design Challenge Winners article 1 week ago 1 min read Indoor Testing Facilities available at the NASA Unmanned Autonomy Research Complex (NUARC) article 2 weeks ago Highlights 5 min read NASA’s Curiosity Finds Organic Molecules Never Seen Before on Mars article 1 day ago 1 min read Amendment 51: C.6 Development and Advancement of Lunar Instrumentation Not Solicited in ROSES-25 article 1 week ago 2 min read Snow in the Shadow of the Andes article 2 weeks ago Highlights 1 min read Join the Artemis Mission to the Moon article 5 months ago Highlights 4 min read NASA, Organ Sharing Network UNOS to Study Faster Organ Transport article 1 day ago 2 min read NASA Wins Two Webby Awards, Five Webby People’s Voice Awards article 1 day ago 6 min read Advancing Earth Observation at NASA Since Release of Earthrise Photo article 9 hours ago Highlights 11 min read La NASA anuncia la cobertura de la misión lunar Artemis II article 4 weeks ago 15 min read Agenda diaria de la misión a la Luna de Artemis II de la NASA article 1 month ago 6 min read La NASA refuerza Artemis: añade una misión y perfecciona su arquitectura general article 2 months ago Explore the Universe Universe Home Basics Cosmic History Building Blocks Forces Galaxies Overview Types Evolution Large Scale Structures Black Holes Overview Types Anatomy Black Hole Week Stars Overview Types Multiple Star Systems Planetary Systems Exoplanets Exploration Sensing the Universe Telescopes 101 Observatories More News Deep Dives Quick Reads Graphics Glossary Fun &amp; Learning Building Blocks Contents The Universe’s Building Blocks Normal Matter Dark Matter Dark Energy The Universe’s Building Blocks Everything scientists can observe in the universe, from people to planets, is made of matter. Matter is defined as any substance that has mass and occupies space. But there’s more to the universe than the matter we can see. Dark matter and dark energy are mysterious substances that affect and shape the cosmos, and scientists are still trying to figure them out. The universe is made up of three components: normal or visible matter (5%), dark matter (27%), and dark energy (68%). NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center Normal Matter Normal matter makes up everything we can directly observe. We can view it in visible light with our own eyes or through a telescope that can detect light we can’t see, like ultraviolet or infrared. Most normal matter is made up of atomic particles: protons, neutrons, and electrons. It can exist as a gas, solid, liquid, or plasma of charged particles. While normal matter is everywhere in our daily lives, it composes less than 5% of the total universe. Dark Matter Like ordinary matter, dark matter takes up space and holds mass. But it doesn’t reflect, absorb, or radiate light – at least not enough for us to detect yet. While scientists have measured that dark matter makes up about 27% of the cosmos, they’re not sure what it is. Theories include several kinds of as-yet unidentified types of particles that rarely interact with normal matter. NASA's Hubble Space Telescope captured the magnificent starry population of the Coma galaxy cluster, one of the densest-known galaxy collections. The view, spanning several million light-years across, covers a large portion near the cluster’s center. NASA, ESA, and the Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA) Astronomers didn’t even know dark matter existed until the 20th century. In the 1930s, Swiss astronomer Fritz Zwicky coined the term while studying the Coma galaxy cluster, which contains more than 1,000 galaxies. The speed at which galaxies within a galaxy cluster move depends on the cluster’s total mass and size. Zwicky noticed that galaxies in the Coma cluster were moving faster than could be explained by the amount of matter astronomers could see there. It wasn’t until the 1970s that U.S. astronomer Vera Rubin confirmed the existence of dark matter by studying how individual galaxies rotated. She and her colleagues found that individual galaxies may contain invisible mass made of dark matter. Scientists today think dark matter exists in a vast, web-like structure that winds through the whole universe – a gravitational scaffold that attracts most of the cosmos’ normal matter. They’ve determined that dark matter isn’t composed of known particles of matter because the universe would look very different if it were. The search for what makes up dark matter continues. Dark Energy Dark energy may compose roughly 68% of the universe, but scientists know even less about it than they do about dark matter. But something like dark energy must exist to explain the universe’s accelerating expansion. Since the late 1920s, astronomers have known that the universe is expanding. In the 1990s, observations of distant star explosions, called supernovae, showed that the universe expanded more slowly in the past than it does now. The reason for this remains unclear, but the leading explanation is that the universe contains something that has a repulsive gravitational effect – it pushes the universe apart instead of pulling it back together. This phenomenon is called dark energy. Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Galaxies Black Holes Stars Exoplanets National Aeronautics and Space Administration NASA explores the unknown in air and space, innovates for the benefit of humanity, and inspires the world through discovery. About NASA&#039;s Mission Join Us Home News &amp; Events Multimedia NASA+ Missions Humans in Space Earth The Solar System The Universe Science Aeronautics Technology Learning Resources About NASA NASA en Español Follow NASA More NASA Social Accounts NASA Newsletters Sitemap For Media Privacy Policy FOIA No FEAR Act Office of the IG Budget &amp; Annual Reports Agency Financial Reports Contact NASA Accessibility Page Last Updated: Mar 11, 2026 Page Editor: Jeanette Kazmierczak Responsible NASA Official for Science: Diana Logreira &#916; Did you find what you were looking for? (Required) Yes No Partly What were you looking for? (Required) What were you hoping to accomplish by visiting our website? (Required) ×