Black Holes - NASA Science Explore Search News &amp; Events News &amp; Events Recently Published Video Series on NASA+ Podcasts &amp; Audio Blogs Newsletters Social Media Media Resources Multimedia Multimedia Images Videos on NASA+ Interactives NASA Apps Podcasts e-Books STEM Multimedia NASA+ Search Suggested Searches Climate Change Artemis Expedition 64 Mars perseverance SpaceX Crew-2 International Space Station View All Topics A-Z Home Missions Humans in Space Earth The Solar System The Universe Science Aeronautics Technology Learning Resources About NASA Español News &amp; Events Multimedia NASA+ Highlights 3 min read Nutrition Research Arrives Aboard Space Station article 1 week ago 6 min read ‘Interstellar Glaciers’: NASA’s SPHEREx Maps Vast Galactic Ice Regions article 1 week ago 5 min read NASA Finds Young Stars Dim in X-rays Surprisingly Quickly article 1 week ago Back Missions Search All NASA Missions A to Z List of Missions Upcoming Launches and Landings Spaceships and Rockets Communicating with Missions Artemis James Webb Space Telescope Hubble Space Telescope International Space Station OSIRIS-REx Humans in Space Why Go to Space Astronauts Commercial Space Destinations Spaceships and Rockets Living in Space Earth Explore Earth Science Climate Change Earth, Our Planet Earth Science in Action Earth Multimedia Earth Data Earth Science Researchers The Solar System The Sun Mercury Venus Earth The Moon Mars Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Pluto &amp; Dwarf Planets Asteroids, Comets &amp; Meteors The Kuiper Belt The Oort Cloud Skywatching The Universe Exoplanets The Search for Life in the Universe Stars Galaxies Black Holes The Big Bang Dark Matter Dark Energy Science Earth Science Planetary Science Astrophysics &amp; Space Science The Sun &amp; Heliophysics Biological &amp; Physical Sciences Lunar Science Citizen Science Astromaterials Aeronautics Research Human Space Travel Research Aeronautics Science in the Air NASA Aircraft Flight Innovation Supersonic Flight Air Traffic Solutions Green Aviation Tech Drones &amp; You Technology Technology Transfer &amp; Spinoffs Space Travel Technology Technology Living in Space Manufacturing and Materials Robotics Science Instruments Computing Learning Resources For Kids and Students For Educators For Colleges and Universities For Professionals Science for Everyone Requests for Exhibits, Artifacts, or Speakers STEM Engagement at NASA About NASA NASA&#039;s Impacts Centers and Facilities Directorates Organizations People of NASA Careers Internships Our History Doing Business with NASA Get Involved Contact NASA en Español Ciencia Aeronáutica Ciencias Terrestres Sistema Solar Universo News &amp; Events Recently Published Video Series on NASA+ Podcasts &amp; Audio Blogs Newsletters Social Media Media Resources Multimedia Images Videos on NASA+ Interactives NASA Apps Podcasts e-Books STEM Multimedia Highlights 6 min read ‘Interstellar Glaciers’: NASA’s SPHEREx Maps Vast Galactic Ice Regions article 1 week ago 5 min read NASA Finds Young Stars Dim in X-rays Surprisingly Quickly article 1 week ago 5 min read NASA’s Webb Redefines Dividing Line Between Planets, Stars article 1 week ago Highlights 5 min read Artemis II Mission Milestones: An Image and Video Recap article 17 hours ago 12 min read NASA Answers Your Most Pressing Artemis II Questions article 3 weeks ago 1 min read Artemis II Podcast Series article 4 weeks ago Highlights 1 min read Earth Day 2026: Posters and Virtual Backgrounds article 5 hours ago 6 min read Advancing Earth Observation at NASA Since Release of Earthrise Photo article 5 hours ago 3 min read Belts of Green in the Washington Suburbs article 15 hours ago Highlights 5 min read NASA’s Curiosity Finds Organic Molecules Never Seen Before on Mars article 1 day ago 1 min read Amendment 51: C.6 Development and Advancement of Lunar Instrumentation Not Solicited in ROSES-25 article 1 week ago 3 min read Twin NASA Control Rooms Support Artemis Safety, Success article 2 weeks ago Highlights 6 min read NASA’s Hubble Dazzles With Young Stars in Trifid Nebula article 2 days ago 6 min read ‘Interstellar Glaciers’: NASA’s SPHEREx Maps Vast Galactic Ice Regions article 1 week ago 5 min read NASA Finds Young Stars Dim in X-rays Surprisingly Quickly article 1 week ago Highlights 1 min read Integrated Modeling Virtual Institute (IMVI) article 1 hour ago 1 min read Early Career Investigator Program – Earth Science (ROSES A.11) article 2 hours ago 3 min read Belts of Green in the Washington Suburbs article 15 hours ago Highlights 4 min read NASA, Organ Sharing Network UNOS to Study Faster Organ Transport article 1 day ago 1 min read 2025-2026 Dream with Us Design Challenge Winners article 1 week ago 1 min read Indoor Testing Facilities available at the NASA Unmanned Autonomy Research Complex (NUARC) article 2 weeks ago Highlights 5 min read NASA’s Curiosity Finds Organic Molecules Never Seen Before on Mars article 1 day ago 1 min read Amendment 51: C.6 Development and Advancement of Lunar Instrumentation Not Solicited in ROSES-25 article 1 week ago 2 min read Snow in the Shadow of the Andes article 2 weeks ago Highlights 1 min read Join the Artemis Mission to the Moon article 5 months ago Highlights 4 min read NASA Night-light Imagery Tracks US Energy Transition, Global Volatility article 1 week ago Highlights 11 min read La NASA anuncia la cobertura de la misión lunar Artemis II article 4 weeks ago 15 min read Agenda diaria de la misión a la Luna de Artemis II de la NASA article 1 month ago 6 min read La NASA refuerza Artemis: añade una misión y perfecciona su arquitectura general article 2 months ago Explore the Universe Universe Home Basics Cosmic History Building Blocks Forces Galaxies Overview Types Evolution Large Scale Structures Black Holes Overview Types Anatomy Black Hole Week Stars Overview Types Multiple Star Systems Planetary Systems Exoplanets Exploration Sensing the Universe Telescopes 101 Observatories More News Deep Dives Quick Reads Graphics Glossary Fun &amp; Learning Black Hole Basics Black Holes Black holes are among the most mysterious cosmic objects, much studied but not fully understood. These objects aren’t really holes. They’re huge concentrations of matter packed into very tiny spaces. A black hole is so dense that gravity just beneath its surface, the event horizon, is strong enough that nothing – not even light – can escape. The event horizon isn’t a surface like Earth’s or even the Sun’s. It’s a boundary that contains all the matter that makes up the black hole. There is much we don’t know about black holes, like what matter looks like inside their event horizons. However, there is a lot that scientists do know about black holes. This artist’s concept portrays the supermassive black hole at the center of the Milky Way galaxy, known as Sagittarius A* (A-star). It’s surrounded by a swirling accretion disk of hot gas. The black hole’s gravity bends light from the far side of the disk, making it appear to wrap above and below the black hole. Several flaring hot spots that resemble solar flares, but on a more energetic scale, are seen in the disk. NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope has detected both bright flares and fainter flickers coming from Sagittarius A*. The flickers are so rapid they must originate very close to the black hole. Illustration: NASA, ESA, CSA, Ralf Crawford (STScI) Finding Black Holes Black holes don’t emit or reflect light, making them effectively invisible to telescopes. Scientists primarily detect and study them based on how they affect their surroundings: Black holes can be surrounded by rings of gas and dust, called accretion disks, that emit light across many wavelengths, including X-rays. A supermassive black hole’s intense gravity can cause stars to orbit around it in a particular way. Astronomers tracked the orbits of several stars near the center of the Milky Way to prove it houses a supermassive black hole, a discovery that won the 2020 Nobel Prize. When very massive objects accelerate through space, they create ripples in the fabric of space-time called gravitational waves. Scientists can detect some of these by the ripples’ effect on detectors. Massive objects like black holes can bend and distort light from more distant objects. This effect, called gravitational lensing, can be used to find isolated black holes that are otherwise invisible. Black Holes Are Not ... Wormholes. They don’t provide shortcuts between different points in space, or portals to other dimensions or universes. Cosmic vacuum cleaners. Black holes don’t suck in other matter. From far enough away, their gravitational effects are just like those of other objects of the same mass. Black holes - what are they really? Learn this and more with “Astro-Investigates,” the video series that explores and explains big astrophysics topics with the help of NASA scientists. NASA Essential Black Hole Facts 01 Closest The nearest known black hole, called Gaia BH1, is about 1,500 light-years away. 02 Farthest The most distant black hole detected, at the center of a galaxy called QSO J0313-1806, is around 13 billion light-years away. 03 Biggest The most massive black hole observed, TON 618, tips the scales at 66 billion times the Sun’s mass. 04 Smallest The lightest-known black hole is only 3.8 times the Sun’s mass. It’s paired up with a star. 05 Spaghettification A real term that describes what happens when matter gets too close to a black hole. It’s squeezed horizontally and stretched vertically, resembling a noodle. 06 Spin All black holes spin. The fastest-known – named GRS 1915+105 – clocks in at over 1,000 rotations per second. 07 Particle accelerators Monster black holes at the centers of galaxies can launch particles to near light speed. 08 Gravity's the same If you replaced the Sun with a black hole of the same mass, the solar system would get a lot colder, but the planets would stay in their orbits. 09 Star booms One type of black hole is born when massive stars run out of fuel and explode in supernovae. 10 Not so rare Most Milky Way-sized galaxies have monster black holes at their centers. Our is called Sagittarius A* (pronounced ey-star), and it’s 4 million times the Sun’s mass. An illustration of a quasar. The colors depicted in this illustration are for artistic purposes only. NASA Black Hole News Explore All Black Hole News Blog 2 Min Read Archival Data From NASA’s NEOWISE Tracks Star Turning Into Black Hole Article 3 Min Read NASA, Partners Advance LISA Prototype Hardware 7 Min Read NASA’s Webb Delivers Unprecedented Look Into Heart of Circinus Galaxy Article 5 Min Read NASA’s Chandra Finds Small Galaxies May Buck the Black Hole Trend Article 11 Min Read Black Hole Eats Star: NASA Missions Discover Record-Setting Blast Article Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Universe Galaxies Stars Exoplanets National Aeronautics and Space Administration NASA explores the unknown in air and space, innovates for the benefit of humanity, and inspires the world through discovery. About NASA&#039;s Mission Join Us Home News &amp; Events Multimedia NASA+ Missions Humans in Space Earth The Solar System The Universe Science Aeronautics Technology Learning Resources About NASA NASA en Español Follow NASA More NASA Social Accounts NASA Newsletters Sitemap For Media Privacy Policy FOIA No FEAR Act Office of the IG Budget &amp; Annual Reports Agency Financial Reports Contact NASA Accessibility Page Last Updated: Mar 11, 2026 Page Editor: Jeanette Kazmierczak Responsible NASA Official for Science: Diana Logreira &#916; Did you find what you were looking for? (Required) Yes No Partly What were you looking for? (Required) What were you hoping to accomplish by visiting our website? (Required) ×