Types - NASA Science Explore Search News &amp; Events News &amp; Events Recently Published Video Series on NASA+ Podcasts &amp; Audio Blogs Newsletters Social Media Media Resources Multimedia Multimedia Images Videos on NASA+ Interactives NASA Apps Podcasts e-Books STEM Multimedia NASA+ Search Suggested Searches Climate Change Artemis Expedition 64 Mars perseverance SpaceX Crew-2 International Space Station View All Topics A-Z Home Missions Humans in Space Earth The Solar System The Universe Science Aeronautics Technology Learning Resources About NASA Español News &amp; Events Multimedia NASA+ Highlights 3 min read Nutrition Research Arrives Aboard Space Station article 1 week ago 6 min read ‘Interstellar Glaciers’: NASA’s SPHEREx Maps Vast Galactic Ice Regions article 1 week ago 5 min read NASA Finds Young Stars Dim in X-rays Surprisingly Quickly article 1 week ago Back Missions Search All NASA Missions A to Z List of Missions Upcoming Launches and Landings Spaceships and Rockets Communicating with Missions Artemis James Webb Space Telescope Hubble Space Telescope International Space Station OSIRIS-REx Humans in Space Why Go to Space Astronauts Commercial Space Destinations Spaceships and Rockets Living in Space Earth Explore Earth Science Climate Change Earth, Our Planet Earth Science in Action Earth Multimedia Earth Data Earth Science Researchers The Solar System The Sun Mercury Venus Earth The Moon Mars Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Pluto &amp; Dwarf Planets Asteroids, Comets &amp; Meteors The Kuiper Belt The Oort Cloud Skywatching The Universe Exoplanets The Search for Life in the Universe Stars Galaxies Black Holes The Big Bang Dark Matter Dark Energy Science Earth Science Planetary Science Astrophysics &amp; Space Science The Sun &amp; Heliophysics Biological &amp; Physical Sciences Lunar Science Citizen Science Astromaterials Aeronautics Research Human Space Travel Research Aeronautics Science in the Air NASA Aircraft Flight Innovation Supersonic Flight Air Traffic Solutions Green Aviation Tech Drones &amp; You Technology Technology Transfer &amp; Spinoffs Space Travel Technology Technology Living in Space Manufacturing and Materials Robotics Science Instruments Computing Learning Resources For Kids and Students For Educators For Colleges and Universities For Professionals Science for Everyone Requests for Exhibits, Artifacts, or Speakers STEM Engagement at NASA About NASA NASA&#039;s Impacts Centers and Facilities Directorates Organizations People of NASA Careers Internships Our History Doing Business with NASA Get Involved Contact NASA en Español Ciencia Aeronáutica Ciencias Terrestres Sistema Solar Universo News &amp; Events Recently Published Video Series on NASA+ Podcasts &amp; Audio Blogs Newsletters Social Media Media Resources Multimedia Images Videos on NASA+ Interactives NASA Apps Podcasts e-Books STEM Multimedia Highlights 6 min read ‘Interstellar Glaciers’: NASA’s SPHEREx Maps Vast Galactic Ice Regions article 1 week ago 5 min read NASA Finds Young Stars Dim in X-rays Surprisingly Quickly article 1 week ago 5 min read NASA’s Webb Redefines Dividing Line Between Planets, Stars article 1 week ago Highlights 5 min read Artemis II Mission Milestones: An Image and Video Recap article 17 hours ago 12 min read NASA Answers Your Most Pressing Artemis II Questions article 3 weeks ago 1 min read Artemis II Podcast Series article 4 weeks ago Highlights 1 min read Earth Day 2026: Posters and Virtual Backgrounds article 5 hours ago 6 min read Advancing Earth Observation at NASA Since Release of Earthrise Photo article 5 hours ago 3 min read Belts of Green in the Washington Suburbs article 15 hours ago Highlights 5 min read NASA’s Curiosity Finds Organic Molecules Never Seen Before on Mars article 1 day ago 1 min read Amendment 51: C.6 Development and Advancement of Lunar Instrumentation Not Solicited in ROSES-25 article 1 week ago 3 min read Twin NASA Control Rooms Support Artemis Safety, Success article 2 weeks ago Highlights 6 min read NASA’s Hubble Dazzles With Young Stars in Trifid Nebula article 2 days ago 6 min read ‘Interstellar Glaciers’: NASA’s SPHEREx Maps Vast Galactic Ice Regions article 1 week ago 5 min read NASA Finds Young Stars Dim in X-rays Surprisingly Quickly article 1 week ago Highlights 1 min read Integrated Modeling Virtual Institute (IMVI) article 2 hours ago 1 min read Early Career Investigator Program – Earth Science (ROSES A.11) article 2 hours ago 3 min read Belts of Green in the Washington Suburbs article 15 hours ago Highlights 4 min read NASA, Organ Sharing Network UNOS to Study Faster Organ Transport article 1 day ago 1 min read 2025-2026 Dream with Us Design Challenge Winners article 1 week ago 1 min read Indoor Testing Facilities available at the NASA Unmanned Autonomy Research Complex (NUARC) article 2 weeks ago Highlights 5 min read NASA’s Curiosity Finds Organic Molecules Never Seen Before on Mars article 1 day ago 1 min read Amendment 51: C.6 Development and Advancement of Lunar Instrumentation Not Solicited in ROSES-25 article 1 week ago 2 min read Snow in the Shadow of the Andes article 2 weeks ago Highlights 1 min read Join the Artemis Mission to the Moon article 5 months ago Highlights 4 min read NASA Night-light Imagery Tracks US Energy Transition, Global Volatility article 1 week ago Highlights 11 min read La NASA anuncia la cobertura de la misión lunar Artemis II article 4 weeks ago 15 min read Agenda diaria de la misión a la Luna de Artemis II de la NASA article 1 month ago 6 min read La NASA refuerza Artemis: añade una misión y perfecciona su arquitectura general article 2 months ago Explore the Universe Universe Home Basics Cosmic History Building Blocks Forces Galaxies Overview Types Evolution Large Scale Structures Black Holes Overview Types Anatomy Black Hole Week Stars Overview Types Multiple Star Systems Planetary Systems Exoplanets Exploration Sensing the Universe Telescopes 101 Observatories More News Deep Dives Quick Reads Graphics Glossary Fun &amp; Learning Star Types Contents Types of Stars Main Sequence Stars Red Giants White Dwarfs Neutron Stars Red Dwarfs Brown Dwarfs Types of Stars The universe’s stars range in brightness, size, color, and behavior. Some types change into others very quickly, while others stay relatively unchanged over trillions of years. Main Sequence Stars NASA’s Solar Dynamics Observatory captured this image of our 4.6-billion-year-old Sun, a main sequence star. Scientists expect it will remain one for another 5 billion years before becoming a red giant. NASA's Scientific Visualization Studio/SDO A normal star forms from a clump of dust and gas in a stellar nursery. Over hundreds of thousands of years, the clump gains mass, starts to spin, and heats up. When the clump's core heats up to millions of degrees, nuclear fusion starts. This process occurs when two protons, the nuclei of hydrogen atoms, merge to form one helium nucleus. Fusion releases energy that heats the star, creating pressure that pushes against the force of its gravity. A star is born. Scientists call a star that is fusing hydrogen to helium in its core a main sequence star. Main sequence stars make up around 90% of the universe’s stellar population. They range in luminosity, color, and size – from a tenth to 200 times the Sun’s mass – and live for millions to billions of years. For Stargazers: Many main sequence stars can be seen with the unaided eye, such as Sirius – the brightest star in the night sky – in the northern constellation Canis Major. Rigil Kentaurus (better known as Alpha Centauri) in the southern constellation Centaurus is the closest main sequence star that can be seen with the unaided eye.&nbsp; Red Giants This illustration depicts a red giant star, like Betelgeuse or Antares. NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center/Chris Smith (KBRwyle) When a main sequence star less than eight times the Sun’s mass runs out of hydrogen in its core, it starts to collapse because the energy produced by fusion is the only force fighting gravity’s tendency to pull matter together. But squeezing the core also increases its temperature and pressure, so much so that its helium starts to fuse into carbon, which also releases energy. Hydrogen fusion begins moving into the star’s outer layers, causing them to expand. The result is a red giant, which would appear more orange than red. Eventually, the red giant becomes unstable and begins pulsating, periodically expanding and ejecting some of its atmosphere. Eventually, all of its outer layers blow away, creating an expanding cloud of dust and gas called a planetary nebula. The Sun will become a red giant in about 5 billion years. For Stargazers: Arcturus in the northern constellation Boötes and Gamma Crucis in the southern constellation Crux (the Southern Cross) are red giants visible to the unaided eye. White Dwarfs In this illustration, an asteroid (bottom left) breaks apart under the powerful gravity of LSPM J0207+3331, the oldest, coldest white dwarf known to be surrounded by a ring of dusty debris. NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center/Scott Wiessinger After a red giant has shed all its atmosphere, only the core remains. Scientists call this kind of stellar remnant a white dwarf. A white dwarf is usually Earth-size but hundreds of thousands of times more massive. A teaspoon of its material would weigh more than a pickup truck. A white dwarf produces no new heat of its own, so it gradually cools over billions of years. Despite the name, white dwarfs can emit visible light that ranges from blue white to red. Scientists sometimes find that white dwarfs are surrounded by dusty disks of material, debris, and even planets – leftovers from the original star’s red giant phase. In about 10 billion years, after its time as a red giant, the Sun will become a white dwarf. For Stargazers: White dwarfs are too dim to see with the unaided eye, although some can be found in binary systems with an easily seen main sequence star. Procyon B is an example in the northern constellation Canis Minor. If you have a telescope at home, though, you can see solitary white dwarfs LP 145-141 in the southern constellation Musca and Van Maanen’s star in the northern constellation Pisces. Neutron Stars The Vela pulsar is located in the circular white dot in the center of this image captured by NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory. The pulsar resides over 1,000 light-years away in the southern constellation Vela. NASA/CXC/Univ of Toronto/M. Durant et al. Neutron stars are stellar remnants that pack more mass than the Sun into a sphere about as wide as New York City’s Manhattan Island is long. A neutron star forms when a main sequence star with between about eight and 20 times the Sun’s mass runs out of hydrogen in its core. (Heavier stars produce stellar-mass black holes.) The star starts fusing helium to carbon, like lower-mass stars. But then, when the core runs out of helium, it shrinks, heats up, and starts converting its carbon into neon, which releases energy. This process continues as the star converts neon into oxygen, oxygen into silicon, and finally silicon into iron. These processes produce energy that keep the core from collapsing, but each new fuel buys it less and less time. By the time silicon fuses into iron, the star runs out of fuel in a matter of days. The next step would be fusing iron into some heavier element, but doing so requires energy instead of releasing it. The core collapses and then rebounds back to its original size, creating a shock wave that travels through the star’s outer layers. The result is a huge explosion called a supernova. The remnant core is a superdense neutron star. Pulsars: These are a type of rapidly rotating neutron star. Bright X-ray hot spots form on the surfaces of these objects. As they rotate, the spots spin in and out of view like the beams of a lighthouse. Some pulsars spin faster than blender blades. Magnetars: All neutron stars have strong magnetic fields. But a magnetar’s can be 10 trillion times stronger than a refrigerator magnet’s and up to a thousand times stronger than a typical neutron star’s. For Stargazers: Neutron stars are too faint to see with the unaided eye or backyard telescopes, although the Hubble Space Telescope has been able to capture a few in visible light. Astronomers usually observe them via X-rays and radio emission. Red Dwarfs Our closest stellar neighbor, shown here in this Hubble image, is the red dwarf Proxima Centauri. It’s just over 4 light-years away in the southern constellation Centaurus. ESA/Hubble &amp; NASA Red dwarfs are the smallest main sequence stars – just a fraction of the Sun’s size and mass. They’re also the coolest, and appear more orange in color than red. When a red dwarf produces helium via fusion in its core, the released energy brings material to the star’s surface, where it cools and sinks back down, taking along a fresh supply of hydrogen to the core. Because of this constant churning, red dwarfs can steadily burn through their entire supply of hydrogen over trillions of years without changing their internal structures, unlike other stars. Scientists think some low-mass red dwarfs, those with just a third of the Sun’s mass, have life spans longer than the current age of the universe, up to about 14 trillion years. Red dwarfs are also born in much greater numbers than more massive stars. Because of that, and because they live so long, red dwarfs make up around 75% of the Milky Way galaxy’s stellar population. For Stargazers: Red dwarfs are too faint to see with the unaided eye. But with a backyard telescope, you may be able to see Lacaille 8760 in the southern constellation Microscopium or Lalande 21185 in the northern constellation Ursa Major. Brown Dwarfs Brown dwarf LSRJ1835+3259, illustrated here, resides 20 light-years away in the northern constellation Lyra. Chuck Carter and Gregg Hallinan/Caltech Brown dwarfs aren’t technically stars. They’re more massive than planets but not quite as massive as stars. Generally, they have between 13 and 80 times the mass of Jupiter. They emit almost no visible light, but scientists have seen a few in infrared light. Some brown dwarfs form the same way as main sequence stars, from gas and dust clumps in nebulae, but they never gain enough mass to do fusion on the scale of a main sequence star. Others may form like planets, from disks of gas and dust around stars. For Stargazers: Brown dwarfs are invisible to both the unaided eye and backyard telescopes. This artist’s concept compares star sizes to common objects. Start by imagining the Sun is the size of a beach ball … NASA Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Universe Galaxies Black Holes Exoplanets National Aeronautics and Space Administration NASA explores the unknown in air and space, innovates for the benefit of humanity, and inspires the world through discovery. About NASA&#039;s Mission Join Us Home News &amp; Events Multimedia NASA+ Missions Humans in Space Earth The Solar System The Universe Science Aeronautics Technology Learning Resources About NASA NASA en Español Follow NASA More NASA Social Accounts NASA Newsletters Sitemap For Media Privacy Policy FOIA No FEAR Act Office of the IG Budget &amp; Annual Reports Agency Financial Reports Contact NASA Accessibility Page Last Updated: Mar 11, 2026 Page Editor: Jeanette Kazmierczak Responsible NASA Official for Science: Diana Logreira &#916; Did you find what you were looking for? (Required) Yes No Partly What were you looking for? (Required) What were you hoping to accomplish by visiting our website? (Required) ×