How Do We Know There Are Black Holes? - NASA Science Explore Search News &amp; Events News &amp; Events Recently Published Video Series on NASA+ Podcasts &amp; Audio Blogs Newsletters Social Media Media Resources Multimedia Multimedia Images Videos on NASA+ Interactives NASA Apps Podcasts e-Books STEM Multimedia NASA+ Search Suggested Searches Climate Change Artemis Expedition 64 Mars perseverance SpaceX Crew-2 International Space Station View All Topics A-Z Home Missions Humans in Space Earth The Solar System The Universe Science Aeronautics Technology Learning Resources About NASA Español News &amp; Events Multimedia NASA+ Highlights 6 min read Advancing Earth Observation at NASA Since Release of Earthrise Photo article 9 hours ago 5 min read NASA’s Curiosity Finds Organic Molecules Never Seen Before on Mars article 1 day ago 2 min read NASA Wins Two Webby Awards, Five Webby People’s Voice Awards article 1 day ago Back Missions Search All NASA Missions A to Z List of Missions Upcoming Launches and Landings Spaceships and Rockets Communicating with Missions Artemis James Webb Space Telescope Hubble Space Telescope International Space Station OSIRIS-REx Humans in Space Why Go to Space Astronauts Commercial Space Destinations Spaceships and Rockets Living in Space Earth Explore Earth Science Climate Change Earth, Our Planet Earth Science in Action Earth Multimedia Earth Data Earth Science Researchers The Solar System The Sun Mercury Venus Earth The Moon Mars Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Pluto &amp; Dwarf Planets Asteroids, Comets &amp; Meteors The Kuiper Belt The Oort Cloud Skywatching The Universe Exoplanets The Search for Life in the Universe Stars Galaxies Black Holes The Big Bang Dark Matter Dark Energy Science Earth Science Planetary Science Astrophysics &amp; Space Science The Sun &amp; Heliophysics Biological &amp; Physical Sciences Lunar Science Citizen Science Astromaterials Aeronautics Research Human Space Travel Research Aeronautics Science in the Air NASA Aircraft Flight Innovation Supersonic Flight Air Traffic Solutions Green Aviation Tech Drones &amp; You Technology Technology Transfer &amp; Spinoffs Space Travel Technology Technology Living in Space Manufacturing and Materials Robotics Science Instruments Computing Learning Resources For Kids and Students For Educators For Colleges and Universities For Professionals Science for Everyone Requests for Exhibits, Artifacts, or Speakers STEM Engagement at NASA About NASA NASA&#039;s Impacts Centers and Facilities Directorates Organizations People of NASA Careers Internships Our History Doing Business with NASA Get Involved Contact NASA en Español Ciencia Aeronáutica Ciencias Terrestres Sistema Solar Universo News &amp; Events Recently Published Video Series on NASA+ Podcasts &amp; Audio Blogs Newsletters Social Media Media Resources Multimedia Images Videos on NASA+ Interactives NASA Apps Podcasts e-Books STEM Multimedia Highlights 5 min read NASA’s Curiosity Finds Organic Molecules Never Seen Before on Mars article 1 day ago 5 min read NASA on Track for Future Missions with Initial Artemis II Assessments article 2 days ago 6 min read NASA’s Hubble Dazzles With Young Stars in Trifid Nebula article 2 days ago Highlights 5 min read Artemis II Mission Milestones: An Image and Video Recap article 21 hours ago 12 min read NASA Answers Your Most Pressing Artemis II Questions article 3 weeks ago 1 min read Artemis II Podcast Series article 4 weeks ago Highlights 3 min read NASA’s 777 Aircraft Returns Home with Science Flights on the Horizon article 2 hours ago 1 min read Earth Day 2026: Posters and Virtual Backgrounds article 9 hours ago 6 min read Advancing Earth Observation at NASA Since Release of Earthrise Photo article 9 hours ago Highlights 5 min read NASA’s Curiosity Finds Organic Molecules Never Seen Before on Mars article 1 day ago 1 min read Amendment 51: C.6 Development and Advancement of Lunar Instrumentation Not Solicited in ROSES-25 article 1 week ago 3 min read Twin NASA Control Rooms Support Artemis Safety, Success article 2 weeks ago Highlights 6 min read NASA’s Hubble Dazzles With Young Stars in Trifid Nebula article 2 days ago 6 min read ‘Interstellar Glaciers’: NASA’s SPHEREx Maps Vast Galactic Ice Regions article 1 week ago 5 min read NASA Finds Young Stars Dim in X-rays Surprisingly Quickly article 1 week ago Highlights 3 min read NASA’s 777 Aircraft Returns Home with Science Flights on the Horizon article 2 hours ago 1 min read Integrated Modeling Virtual Institute (IMVI) article 6 hours ago 1 min read Early Career Investigator Program – Earth Science (ROSES A.11) article 6 hours ago Highlights 4 min read NASA, Organ Sharing Network UNOS to Study Faster Organ Transport article 1 day ago 1 min read 2025-2026 Dream with Us Design Challenge Winners article 1 week ago 1 min read Indoor Testing Facilities available at the NASA Unmanned Autonomy Research Complex (NUARC) article 2 weeks ago Highlights 5 min read NASA’s Curiosity Finds Organic Molecules Never Seen Before on Mars article 1 day ago 1 min read Amendment 51: C.6 Development and Advancement of Lunar Instrumentation Not Solicited in ROSES-25 article 1 week ago 2 min read Snow in the Shadow of the Andes article 2 weeks ago Highlights 1 min read Join the Artemis Mission to the Moon article 5 months ago Highlights 4 min read NASA, Organ Sharing Network UNOS to Study Faster Organ Transport article 1 day ago 2 min read NASA Wins Two Webby Awards, Five Webby People’s Voice Awards article 1 day ago 6 min read Advancing Earth Observation at NASA Since Release of Earthrise Photo article 9 hours ago Highlights 11 min read La NASA anuncia la cobertura de la misión lunar Artemis II article 4 weeks ago 15 min read Agenda diaria de la misión a la Luna de Artemis II de la NASA article 1 month ago 6 min read La NASA refuerza Artemis: añade una misión y perfecciona su arquitectura general article 2 months ago Explore Webb Webb News Latest News Latest Images Webb's Blog Awards X (offsite - login reqd) Instagram (offsite - login reqd) Facebook (offsite- login reqd) Youtube (offsite) Overview About Who is James Webb? Fact Sheet Impacts+Benefits FAQ Webb Timeline Science Overview and Goals Early Universe Galaxies Over Time Star Lifecycle Other Worlds Science/Engineering Explainers Observatory Overview Launch Deployment Orbit Mirrors Sunshield Instruments &amp; ISIM Module Instrument: NIRCam Instrument: MIRI Instrument: NIRSpec Instrument: FGS/NIRISS Optical Telescope Element Backplane Spacecraft Bus Multimedia About Webb Images Images Videos What is Webb Observing? 3d Webb in 3d Solar System Podcasts Webb Image Sonifications Webb's First Images Team International Team People Of Webb More For the Media For Scientists For Educators For Fun/Learning How Do We Know There Are Black Holes? Contents They are among the most mysterious and fascinating features of the universe. Supermassive Black Holes They are among the most mysterious and fascinating features of the universe. Black holes are often described as consuming their surrounding gas, the result of gravity so intense that nothing can escape its pull, not even the fastest known traveler in the universe: light itself. But if black holes don’t emit or reflect light, which means we can’t see them, how do astronomers know they are there? The answer applies to many subjects studied in physics and deep-space astronomy — when you can’t observe something directly, or you can’t explain something you are seeing, you make educated guesses based on what you do see: the effect on other objects. On Earth, you can know it’s a windy day without stepping outside, because a flag is flapping. Astronomers know there is a black hole when the stars or gas around it are distorted or otherwise changed. These effects show up in a few ways. Astronomers can observe a star accelerating in orbit around an unseen object (see video above). By measuring the orbiting star’s rate of acceleration, astronomers can calculate the mass of the object pulling on it. When this mass is so compact and large that nothing else can explain it, astronomers conclude it is a black hole. This illustration shows a quasar, an active supermassive black hole at the center of a galaxy. The black hole, which is represented by the black dot, is surrounded by a hot disk of gas, known as an accretion disk. Quasars periodically emit bipolar jets. Download the illustration. Credit: NASA, ESA, CSA, Joseph Olmsted (STScI). In other instances, X-ray telescopes can observe light from binary systems where matter is pulled from the outer layers of a star that orbits a black hole. These black holes accumulate cosmic matter around themselves in a swirling pattern called an&nbsp; accretion disk . Gas particles in the disk accelerate and collide, heating to millions of degrees and giving off detectable X-rays. Black holes causing these types of phenomena are at least a few times the mass of the Sun and are classified as&nbsp; stellar-mass black holes . Supermassive Black Holes On a larger scale,&nbsp; supermassive black &nbsp;holes have a mass of more than 1 million Suns, and so must develop and grow very differently than stellar-mass black holes. Astronomers often determine the presence of supermassive black holes in galaxies using data known as spectra, which can differentiate signals from the hot, faster gas swirling in the black hole’s accretion disk from the cooler, slower gas associated with forming stars. According to observations of intense gravitational attraction and energy in the center of galaxies made by the Hubble Space Telescope since the early 1990s, there is evidence for supermassive black holes at the heart of nearly all large galaxies, including our Milky Way. With greater mass and thus greater gravity, supermassive black holes attract more matter that becomes hotter and more volatile. In some cases, this super-heated matter shoots off into the universe as jets of gas that can be millions of light-years long. Astronomers have observed these gas ejections, known as outflows, and see it as a way of regulating galaxy expansion and the formation of new stars. To see the dynamic dance of dust, stars, and gas clouds being shred apart and falling into a black hole, astronomers need powerful telescopes. Hubble made significant progress in confirming and studying galactic supermassive black holes. The James Webb Space Telescope’s powerful infrared instruments see through the cosmic dust and can help researchers analyze the details of outflows, providing new information about this process and the black hole’s role in galaxy evolution. Webb is able to observe some of the earliest galaxies and black holes that existed. Astronomers think early black holes developed at a much faster rate than black holes that more recently formed nearby, which means that observing these earlier cosmic citizens would shed light on the nature of their descendants, the neighbors we know well and have studied for decades. To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video Learn how astronomers study the light from cosmic objects, like black holes, to learn about how fast (or slowly) they are moving. Animation: NASA, ESA, CSA, Dani Player (STScI); Music: Steve Combs Download the video. National Aeronautics and Space Administration NASA explores the unknown in air and space, innovates for the benefit of humanity, and inspires the world through discovery. About NASA&#039;s Mission Join Us Home News &amp; Events Multimedia NASA+ Missions Humans in Space Earth The Solar System The Universe Science Aeronautics Technology Learning Resources About NASA NASA en Español Follow NASA More NASA Social Accounts NASA Newsletters Sitemap For Media Privacy Policy FOIA No FEAR Act Office of the IG Budget &amp; Annual Reports Agency Financial Reports Contact NASA Accessibility Page Last Updated: Jan 14, 2026 Page Editor: Stephen Sabia Responsible NASA Official for Science: Diana Logreira &#916; Did you find what you were looking for? (Required) Yes No Partly What were you looking for? (Required) What were you hoping to accomplish by visiting our website? (Required) ×