Overview - NASA Science Explore Search News &amp; Events News &amp; Events Recently Published Video Series on NASA+ Podcasts &amp; Audio Blogs Newsletters Social Media Media Resources Multimedia Multimedia Images Videos on NASA+ Interactives NASA Apps Podcasts e-Books STEM Multimedia NASA+ Search Suggested Searches Climate Change Artemis Expedition 64 Mars perseverance SpaceX Crew-2 International Space Station View All Topics A-Z Home Missions Humans in Space Earth The Solar System The Universe Science Aeronautics Technology Learning Resources About NASA Español News &amp; Events Multimedia NASA+ Highlights 6 min read Advancing Earth Observation at NASA Since Release of Earthrise Photo article 9 hours ago 5 min read NASA’s Curiosity Finds Organic Molecules Never Seen Before on Mars article 1 day ago 2 min read NASA Wins Two Webby Awards, Five Webby People’s Voice Awards article 1 day ago Back Missions Search All NASA Missions A to Z List of Missions Upcoming Launches and Landings Spaceships and Rockets Communicating with Missions Artemis James Webb Space Telescope Hubble Space Telescope International Space Station OSIRIS-REx Humans in Space Why Go to Space Astronauts Commercial Space Destinations Spaceships and Rockets Living in Space Earth Explore Earth Science Climate Change Earth, Our Planet Earth Science in Action Earth Multimedia Earth Data Earth Science Researchers The Solar System The Sun Mercury Venus Earth The Moon Mars Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Pluto &amp; Dwarf Planets Asteroids, Comets &amp; Meteors The Kuiper Belt The Oort Cloud Skywatching The Universe Exoplanets The Search for Life in the Universe Stars Galaxies Black Holes The Big Bang Dark Matter Dark Energy Science Earth Science Planetary Science Astrophysics &amp; Space Science The Sun &amp; Heliophysics Biological &amp; Physical Sciences Lunar Science Citizen Science Astromaterials Aeronautics Research Human Space Travel Research Aeronautics Science in the Air NASA Aircraft Flight Innovation Supersonic Flight Air Traffic Solutions Green Aviation Tech Drones &amp; You Technology Technology Transfer &amp; Spinoffs Space Travel Technology Technology Living in Space Manufacturing and Materials Robotics Science Instruments Computing Learning Resources For Kids and Students For Educators For Colleges and Universities For Professionals Science for Everyone Requests for Exhibits, Artifacts, or Speakers STEM Engagement at NASA About NASA NASA&#039;s Impacts Centers and Facilities Directorates Organizations People of NASA Careers Internships Our History Doing Business with NASA Get Involved Contact NASA en Español Ciencia Aeronáutica Ciencias Terrestres Sistema Solar Universo News &amp; Events Recently Published Video Series on NASA+ Podcasts &amp; Audio Blogs Newsletters Social Media Media Resources Multimedia Images Videos on NASA+ Interactives NASA Apps Podcasts e-Books STEM Multimedia Highlights 5 min read NASA’s Curiosity Finds Organic Molecules Never Seen Before on Mars article 1 day ago 5 min read NASA on Track for Future Missions with Initial Artemis II Assessments article 2 days ago 6 min read NASA’s Hubble Dazzles With Young Stars in Trifid Nebula article 2 days ago Highlights 5 min read Artemis II Mission Milestones: An Image and Video Recap article 21 hours ago 12 min read NASA Answers Your Most Pressing Artemis II Questions article 3 weeks ago 1 min read Artemis II Podcast Series article 4 weeks ago Highlights 3 min read NASA’s 777 Aircraft Returns Home with Science Flights on the Horizon article 2 hours ago 1 min read Earth Day 2026: Posters and Virtual Backgrounds article 9 hours ago 6 min read Advancing Earth Observation at NASA Since Release of Earthrise Photo article 9 hours ago Highlights 5 min read NASA’s Curiosity Finds Organic Molecules Never Seen Before on Mars article 1 day ago 1 min read Amendment 51: C.6 Development and Advancement of Lunar Instrumentation Not Solicited in ROSES-25 article 1 week ago 3 min read Twin NASA Control Rooms Support Artemis Safety, Success article 2 weeks ago Highlights 6 min read NASA’s Hubble Dazzles With Young Stars in Trifid Nebula article 2 days ago 6 min read ‘Interstellar Glaciers’: NASA’s SPHEREx Maps Vast Galactic Ice Regions article 1 week ago 5 min read NASA Finds Young Stars Dim in X-rays Surprisingly Quickly article 1 week ago Highlights 3 min read NASA’s 777 Aircraft Returns Home with Science Flights on the Horizon article 2 hours ago 1 min read Integrated Modeling Virtual Institute (IMVI) article 6 hours ago 1 min read Early Career Investigator Program – Earth Science (ROSES A.11) article 7 hours ago Highlights 4 min read NASA, Organ Sharing Network UNOS to Study Faster Organ Transport article 1 day ago 1 min read 2025-2026 Dream with Us Design Challenge Winners article 1 week ago 1 min read Indoor Testing Facilities available at the NASA Unmanned Autonomy Research Complex (NUARC) article 2 weeks ago Highlights 5 min read NASA’s Curiosity Finds Organic Molecules Never Seen Before on Mars article 1 day ago 1 min read Amendment 51: C.6 Development and Advancement of Lunar Instrumentation Not Solicited in ROSES-25 article 1 week ago 2 min read Snow in the Shadow of the Andes article 2 weeks ago Highlights 1 min read Join the Artemis Mission to the Moon article 5 months ago Highlights 4 min read NASA, Organ Sharing Network UNOS to Study Faster Organ Transport article 1 day ago 2 min read NASA Wins Two Webby Awards, Five Webby People’s Voice Awards article 1 day ago 6 min read Advancing Earth Observation at NASA Since Release of Earthrise Photo article 9 hours ago Highlights 11 min read La NASA anuncia la cobertura de la misión lunar Artemis II article 4 weeks ago 15 min read Agenda diaria de la misión a la Luna de Artemis II de la NASA article 1 month ago 6 min read La NASA refuerza Artemis: añade una misión y perfecciona su arquitectura general article 2 months ago Explore the Universe Universe Home Basics Cosmic History Building Blocks Forces Galaxies Overview Types Evolution Large Scale Structures Black Holes Overview Types Anatomy Black Hole Week Stars Overview Types Multiple Star Systems Planetary Systems Exoplanets Exploration Sensing the Universe Telescopes 101 Observatories More News Deep Dives Quick Reads Graphics Glossary Fun &amp; Learning Cosmic History Contents The Universe’s History Cosmic Inflation Big Bang and Nucleosynthesis Recombination Dark Ages First Stars Reionization The Future The Universe’s History The origin, evolution, and nature of the universe have fascinated and confounded humankind for centuries. New ideas and major discoveries made during the 20th century transformed cosmology – the term for the way we conceptualize and study the universe – although much remains unknown. Here is the history of the universe according to cosmologists’ current theories. Cosmic Inflation Around 13.8 billion years ago, the universe expanded faster than the speed of light for a fraction of a second, a period called cosmic inflation. Scientists aren’t sure what came before inflation or what powered it. It’s possible that energy during this period was just part of the fabric of space-time. Cosmologists think inflation explains many aspects of the universe we observe today, like its flatness, or lack of curvature, on the largest scales. Inflation may have also magnified density differences that naturally occur on space’s smallest, quantum-level scales, which eventually helped form the universe’s large-scale structures. NASA Big Bang and Nucleosynthesis When cosmic inflation stopped, the energy driving it transferred to matter and light – the big bang. One second after the big bang, the universe consisted of an extremely hot (18 billion degrees Fahrenheit or 10 billion degrees Celsius) primordial soup of light and particles. In the following minutes, an era called nucleosynthesis, protons and neutrons collided and produced the earliest elements – hydrogen, helium, and traces of lithium and beryllium. After five minutes, most of today’s helium had formed, and the universe had expanded and cooled enough that further element formation stopped. At this point, though, the universe was still too hot for the atomic nuclei of these elements to catch electrons and form complete atoms. The cosmos was opaque because a vast number of electrons created a sort of fog that scattered light. Recombination Around 380,000 years after the big bang, the universe had cooled enough that atomic nuclei could capture electrons, a period astronomers call the epoch of recombination. This had two major effects on the cosmos. First, with most electrons now bound into atoms, there were no longer enough free ones to completely scatter light, and the cosmic fog cleared. The universe became transparent, and for the first time, light could freely travel over great distances. Second, the formation of these first atoms produced its own light. This glow, still detectable today, is called the cosmic microwave background. It is the oldest light we can observe in the universe. Scientists used nine years of data from NASA’s Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe to create this detailed, all-sky image of the cosmic microwave background. The image reveals 13.8-billion-year-old temperature fluctuations (shown as different colors) – seeds that grew into the galaxies we see today. NASA/WMAP Science Team Dark Ages After the cosmic microwave background, the universe again became opaque at shorter wavelengths due to the absorbing effects of all those hydrogen atoms. For the next 200 million years the universe remained dark. There were no stars to shine. The cosmos at this point consisted of a sea of hydrogen atoms, helium, and trace amounts of heavier elements. First Stars Gas was not uniformly distributed throughout the universe. Cooler areas of space were lumpier, with denser clouds of gas. As these clumps grew more massive, their gravity attracted additional matter. As they became denser, and more compact, the centers of these clumps became hotter – hot enough eventually that nuclear fusion occurred in their centers. These were the first stars. They were 30 to 300 times more massive than our Sun and millions of times brighter. Over several hundred million years, the first stars collected into the first galaxies. Reionization At first, starlight couldn’t travel far because it was scattered by the relatively dense gas surrounding the first stars. Gradually, the ultraviolet light emitted by these stars broke down, or ionized, hydrogen atoms in the gas into their constituent electrons and protons. As this reionization progressed, starlight traveled farther, breaking up more and more hydrogen atoms. By the time the universe was 1 billion years old, stars and galaxies had transformed nearly all this gas, making the universe transparent to light as we see it today. The Future For many years, scientists thought the universe’s current expansion was slowing down. But in fact, cosmic expansion is speeding up. In 1998, astronomers found that certain supernovae, bright stellar explosions, were fainter than expected. They concluded this could only happen if the supernovae had moved farther away, at a faster rate than predicted. Scientists suspect a mysterious substance they call dark energy is accelerating expansion. Future research may yield new surprises, but cosmologists suggest it’s likely the universe will continue to expand forever. Big Bang News 18 Min Read Cosmic Dawn with Nobel Laureate John Mather Article 6 Min Read Cosmic Mapmaker: NASA’s SPHEREx Space Telescope Ready to Launch 24 Min Read The Mind-Bending Math Inside Black Holes 6 Min Read How NASA’s Roman Space Telescope Will Illuminate Cosmic Dawn Article 11 Min Read What is Dark Energy? Inside our accelerating, expanding Universe Article Do NASA Science with Redshift Wrangler! Join astronomers and help study the early universe. NASA invites people of all ages and backgrounds to participate in authentic NASA research via "citizen science" or "participatory science" projects, where volunteers and amateurs have helped make thousands of important scientific discoveries. As a part of the Redshift Wrangler project, you'll help scientists use light from distant galaxies to look back in time at the early universe. Get Involved Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Galaxies Black Holes Stars Exoplanets National Aeronautics and Space Administration NASA explores the unknown in air and space, innovates for the benefit of humanity, and inspires the world through discovery. About NASA&#039;s Mission Join Us Home News &amp; Events Multimedia NASA+ Missions Humans in Space Earth The Solar System The Universe Science Aeronautics Technology Learning Resources About NASA NASA en Español Follow NASA More NASA Social Accounts NASA Newsletters Sitemap For Media Privacy Policy FOIA No FEAR Act Office of the IG Budget &amp; Annual Reports Agency Financial Reports Contact NASA Accessibility Page Last Updated: Mar 11, 2026 Page Editor: Jeanette Kazmierczak Responsible NASA Official for Science: Diana Logreira &#916; Did you find what you were looking for? (Required) Yes No Partly What were you looking for? (Required) What were you hoping to accomplish by visiting our website? (Required) ×