Cyber security advice for you &amp; your family | National Cyber Security Centre icons/chevron/16px/black Skip to main content Please enable JavaScript in your web browser to get the best experience. Home About NCSC Report an incident Contact us Open Search Menu Advice &amp; guidance Back Advice &amp; guidance Our advice &amp; guidance covers a broad range of topics Find information for... You &amp; your family Small &amp; medium sized organisations Large organisations Self employed &amp; sole traders Public sector Cyber security professionals All advice and guidance articles Popular topics Active Cyber Defence Critical National Infrastructure (CNI) Passwords Phishing All topics Other resources Glossary of terms Infographics Verify an NCSC contact Heightened cyber threat information Cyber Governance for Boards Respond to a cyber attack Back Respond to a cyber attack Resources for individuals and organisations in the UK who have experienced an online scam or cyber attack. Affecting you or your family Overview Hacked account Suspicious messages Lost money online Device behaving strangely View more... Affecting your small business Overview Suspicious messages Hacked account Business payment fraud Infected device View more... Affecting your organisation Overview Ransomware attack Brand impersonation Denial of service (DoS) attack Malware View more... Find a product or service Back Find a product or service Find a range of products &amp; services from NCSC and certified 3rd party suppliers In this section Overview Browse cyber security services NCSC assured services Assuring technology Search assured providers Cyber Essentials Useful links Active Cyber Defence services MyNCSC Education &amp; skills Back Education &amp; skills Working with industry, government and academia to support the next generation of researchers, students and cyber security professionals Find information for... Schools Higher education Professional skills training Working with the NCSC Research &amp; academia Education &amp; academia resources CyberFirst CyberSprinters (7-11 year olds) CyberFirst Navigators (11-14 year olds) Training resources for school staff Resources for higher education institutions Cyber Security Body of Knowledge (CyBOK) Industry &amp; skill resources CYBERUK 2026 NCSC for StartUps Industry 100 Cyber League News Back News All the latest information to help you keep track of what&#039;s happening In this section News Blogs Speeches Reports &amp; advisories Malware analysis reports CYBERUK 2026 Stay up to date Subscribe About NCSC Report an incident Contact us Close Search Search Please enter a search term Search Popular Searches CYBERUK 2026 Artificial intelligence Phishing Training Cyber Assessment Framework Advice &amp; guidance Select a topic You &amp; your family Small &amp; medium sized organisations Large organisations Self employed &amp; sole traders Public sector Cyber security professionals You &amp; your family Small &amp; medium sized organisations Large organisations Self employed &amp; sole traders Public sector Cyber security professionals Cyber security advice for you &amp; your family Protect yourself with trusted cyber security guidance from the NCSC. Learn how to secure your devices, safeguard personal data, and stay secure online. You wouldn’t leave your front door open so why leave your devices unprotected? Don’t become another statistic – take action to secure your online accounts ; from banking and shopping, to email and social media. It’s more important than ever to make your cyber security a priority.&nbsp; Top tips for staying secure online Actions you can take today, from the government, to stay secure online. View all top tips to stay secure online Getting started Turn on 2-Step Verification (2SV) Manage your passwords using browsers and apps to help you Want to improve your personal cyber security? Answer a few simple questions to get a free personalised cyber action plan. Start action plan Protecting your data Advice from our website that will help you learn more about how to protect your devices. Data breaches: guidance for individuals and families How to protect yourself from the impact of data breaches Online gaming for families and individuals How to enjoy online gaming securely by following just a few tips Shopping and paying safely online Tips to help you purchase items safely and avoid fraudulent websites. Social Media: how to use it safely Use privacy settings across social media platforms to manage your digital footprint. Sextortion emails: how to protect yourself Advice in response to the increase in sextortion scams Video conferencing services: using them securely How to set up and use video conferencing services, such as Zoom and Skype, safely and securely Experienced a scam or cyber attack? Visit respond &amp; recover to find resources for individuals in the UK who have experienced an online scam or cyber attack. Visit respond &amp; recover Protecting your devices Advice from our website that will help you learn more about how to protect your devices. Securing your devices How to ensure your devices are as secure as possible. Smart devices: using them safely in your home Many everyday items are now connected to the internet: we explain how to use them safely. Setting up 2-Step Verification (2SV) How setting up 2SV can help protect your online accounts, even if your password is stolen. Buying, selling and donating second-hand devices How to erase the personal data from your phone, tablets, and other devices (and why it&#039;s important when you&#039;re buying and selling them). What is an antivirus product? Do I need one? Detect and prevent malicious software and viruses on your computer or laptop. &#039;Smart&#039; security cameras: Using them safely in your home How to protect &#039;smart&#039; security cameras and baby monitors from cyber attack. Looking for something else? Browse or search our guidance for individuals and families. View all guidance Was this article helpful? Yes the article was helpful No the article was not helpful Close Feedback Form Back to top Share Close share options Share on Facebook Share on LinkedIn Share on X Copy Link Home Follow us X LinkedIn Instagram Threads RSS About this website Privacy notice Cookies Accessibility Terms &amp; conditions Social media policy Contact the NCSC Report an incident Report suspicious messages or websites Verify an NCSC contact Report a vulnerability Contact the press office Can&#039;t find what you&#039;re looking for? Useful links GCHQ MI5 SIS NPSA GOV.UK