Data breach guidance for individuals icons/chevron/16px/black Skip to main content Please enable JavaScript in your web browser to get the best experience. Home About NCSC Report an incident Contact us Open Search Menu Advice &amp; guidance Back Advice &amp; guidance Our advice &amp; guidance covers a broad range of topics Find information for... You &amp; your family Small &amp; medium sized organisations Large organisations Self employed &amp; sole traders Public sector Cyber security professionals All advice and guidance articles Popular topics Active Cyber Defence Critical National Infrastructure (CNI) Passwords Phishing All topics Other resources Glossary of terms Infographics Verify an NCSC contact Heightened cyber threat information Cyber Governance for Boards Respond to a cyber attack Back Respond to a cyber attack Resources for individuals and organisations in the UK who have experienced an online scam or cyber attack. Affecting you or your family Overview Hacked account Suspicious messages Lost money online Device behaving strangely View more... Affecting your small business Overview Suspicious messages Hacked account Business payment fraud Infected device View more... Affecting your organisation Overview Ransomware attack Brand impersonation Denial of service (DoS) attack Malware View more... Find a product or service Back Find a product or service Find a range of products &amp; services from NCSC and certified 3rd party suppliers In this section Overview Browse cyber security services NCSC assured services Assuring technology Search assured providers Cyber Essentials Useful links Active Cyber Defence services MyNCSC Education &amp; skills Back Education &amp; skills Working with industry, government and academia to support the next generation of researchers, students and cyber security professionals Find information for... Schools Higher education Professional skills training Working with the NCSC Research &amp; academia Education &amp; academia resources CyberFirst CyberSprinters (7-11 year olds) CyberFirst Navigators (11-14 year olds) Training resources for school staff Resources for higher education institutions Cyber Security Body of Knowledge (CyBOK) Industry &amp; skill resources CYBERUK 2026 NCSC for StartUps Industry 100 Cyber League News Back News All the latest information to help you keep track of what&#039;s happening In this section News Blogs Speeches Reports &amp; advisories Malware analysis reports CYBERUK 2026 Stay up to date Subscribe About NCSC Report an incident Contact us Close Search Search Please enter a search term Search Popular Searches CYBERUK 2026 Artificial intelligence Phishing Training Cyber Assessment Framework Guidance Download & print article PDF Download & print article PDF Data breaches: guidance for individuals and families How to protect yourself from the impact of data breaches iStock.com/Christian Horz On this page What is a data breach? How might you be affected? Actions to take following a breach Reporting suspicious messages If you&#039;ve lost money Further information As more aspects of our lives move online, data breaches are a fact of modern life. This guidance explains what data breaches are, how they can affect you, and what you should look out for following a data breach.&nbsp; Note If you think you've already responded to a scam message following a breach, read our guidance on dealing with suspicious messages .&nbsp; What is a data breach? A&nbsp; data breach occurs when information held by an organisation is stolen or accessed without authorisation. Criminals can then use this information when creating phishing messages (such as emails and texts) so that they appear legitimate. The message has been designed to make it sound like you're being individually targeted, when in reality the criminals are sending out millions of these scam messages. Criminals may even send messages pretending to be from an organisation that has suffered a recent data breach. Even if your details are not stolen in the data breach, the criminals will exploit high profile breaches (whilst they are still fresh in people's minds) to try and trick people into clicking on scam messages. How might you be affected? In a typical scam, you might receive a message claiming to be from an organisation that has suffered a recent data breach. The message could ask you to log in and verify your account because 'fraudulent activity has taken place', or similar. These scam messages will typically contain links to websites that look genuine, but which store your real details once you’ve typed them in. Or these websites could install viruses onto your computer, or steal any passwords you enter. Like many phishing scams , these scam messages are hard to spot, and are preying on real-world concerns (in this case, a data breach) to try and trick you into clicking. And it's not just emails or texts. If the information stolen during the breach includes phone numbers, you might receive a suspicious call. The approach may be more direct, asking you for sensitive information (such as banking details or passwords), or access to your computer. Actions to take following a breach If you're a customer of an organisation that has suffered a data breach you should take the following actions. 1.&nbsp;&nbsp;Find out if you've been affected by contacting the organisation using their official website or social media channels. Don't use the links or contact details in any messages you have been sent. The organisation should be able to confirm: if a breach actually occurred how you're affected what else you need to do You can also phone the organisation directly, but be aware that many won’t have the capacity to respond to all calls during a major breach. 2.&nbsp;&nbsp;Be alert to suspicious messages (we've published guidance that can help you with this), which may be sent some time after the breach is made public. Remember, your bank (or any other official organisation) will never ask you to supply personal information. Things to look out for include: official-sounding messages about 'resetting passwords', 'receiving compensation', 'scanning devices' or 'missed deliveries' emails full of 'tech speak', designed to sound more convincing being urged to act immediately or within a limited timeframe 3.&nbsp;&nbsp;If you receive a suspicious message that includes a password you've used in the past, don't panic: if this is a password that you still use, you should change it as soon as you can if any of your other accounts use the same password, you should change them as well when changing passwords, refer to our guidance on creating strong passwords 4.&nbsp;&nbsp;Check your online accounts to confirm there's been no unauthorised activity. Things to look out for include: being unable to log into your accounts changes to your security settings messages or notifications sent from your account that you don't recognise logins or attempted logins from strange locations or at unusual times 5.&nbsp;&nbsp;If you suspect an account of yours has been accessed, refer to the NCSC guidance on recovering a hacked account . 6.&nbsp;&nbsp;To check if your details have appeared in any other public data breaches, there are a number of online tools that you can use, such as https://haveibeenpwned.com . Similar services are often included in antivirus or password manager tools that you may already be using. Reporting suspicious messages If you receive a message or phone call about a security breach that doesn't feel right, here's what to do: if you've received a suspicious email , forward it to the NCSC's Suspicious Email Reporting Service at [email&#160;protected] if you've received a suspicious text message , forward it to 7726 ( a free service ) if you've received nuisance, suspicious or unwanted&nbsp; calls ,&nbsp;hang up and contact your phone provider if you have been a victim of a sextortion scam , then report it to your local police force by calling 101 If you&#039;ve lost money If you've lost money, tell your bank and report it as a crime to Report Fraud , the UK's reporting centre for cyber crime (in Scotland, contact the police by dialling 101). You'll be helping the NCSC and law enforcement to reduce criminal activity, and in the process, prevent others from becoming victims.&nbsp; Further information If you've received nuisance, suspicious or unwanted&nbsp; calls , please refer to this&nbsp; guidance from Ofcom &nbsp;(the regulator for UK communications services). Downloads Pdf 177.51 KB Data breaches - an infographic An infographic accompanying the NCSC's data breach guidance for individuals and families. Topics Personal data Phishing Share and print this article Download & print article PDF Download & print article PDF Share Share Close share options Share on Facebook Share on LinkedIn Share on X Copy Link Published Publish date 28 January 2021 Reviewed 28 January 2021 Version 1.0 Written for Written for You &amp; your family Was this article helpful? Yes the article was helpful No the article was not helpful Close Feedback Form Back to top Share Close share options Share on Facebook Share on LinkedIn Share on X Copy Link Also see News Publish date 9 Nov 2023 Black Friday bargain hunters warned of enhanced online scams after millions lost last year Latest Cyber Aware campaign aims to help shoppers protect themselves online in the run up to the festive period. Guidance The NCSC research problem book The most significant problems which the NCSC believes are in need of concerted and significant collaborative effort from multiple and diverse disciplines over the next decade. Guidance Publish date 30 Jun 2023 How to spot scammers claiming to be from the NCSC Check that you're talking to a genuine NCSC employee, and not a criminal. Home Follow us X LinkedIn Instagram Threads RSS About this website Privacy notice Cookies Accessibility Terms &amp; conditions Social media policy Contact the NCSC Report an incident Report suspicious messages or websites Verify an NCSC contact Report a vulnerability Contact the press office Can&#039;t find what you&#039;re looking for? Useful links GCHQ MI5 SIS NPSA GOV.UK