Secure Our World | CISA Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock A locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Due to the lapse in federal funding, this website will not be actively managed. &nbsp; Read More no-cost Cyber Services Secure by design&nbsp; Secure Your Business Shields Up Report A Cyber Issue &nbsp; Search &nbsp; Menu Close &nbsp; Topics Topics Cybersecurity Best Practices Cyber Threats and Response Critical Infrastructure Security and Resilience Election Security Emergency Communications Industrial Control Systems Information and Communications Technology Supply Chain Security Partnerships and Collaboration Physical Security Risk Management How can we help? Government Educational Institutions Industry State, Local, Tribal, and Territorial Individuals and Families Small and Medium Businesses Find Help Locally Faith-Based Community Executives High-Risk Communities Spotlight Resources &amp; Tools Resources &amp; Tools All Resources &amp; Tools Services Programs Resources Training Groups News &amp; Events News &amp; Events News Events Cybersecurity Alerts &amp; Advisories Request a CISA Speaker Congressional Testimony CISA Conferences CISA Live! Careers Careers Benefits &amp; Perks HireVue Applicant Reasonable Accommodations Process Hiring Resume &amp; Application Tips Students &amp; Recent Graduates Veteran and Military Spouses About About Divisions &amp; Offices Regions Leadership Doing Business with CISA Site Links CISA GitHub CISA Central Contact Us Subscribe Transparency and Accountability Policies &amp; Plans Due to the lapse in federal funding, this website will not be actively managed. &nbsp; Read More no-cost Cyber Services Secure by design&nbsp; Secure Your Business Shields Up Report A Cyber Issue &nbsp; Breadcrumb Home Secure Our World Share: Archived Content In an effort to keep CISA.gov current, the archive contains outdated information that may not reflect current policy or programs. Secure Our World Simple ways to protect yourself, your family and your business from online threats. Staying Safe Online is Easier Than You Think Every day we are more and more connected—whether messaging family and friends, shopping online or ordering supplies for our small businesses. It’s important to take steps to stay safe when using our phones, laptops and smart devices. We can Secure Our World by taking simple actions each day when connected.&nbsp; Four Easy Ways to Stay Safe Online Recognize and Report Phishing Stop Online Crime with Strong Passwords Make Your Accounts Safer with Multifactor Authentication (MFA) Update Software for Safety Learn More About the Four Easy Ways to Stay Safe Online Online criminals look for easy targets, like people who don’t take basic precautions. If we take the following four steps, we won’t be as vulnerable to their deceptive tactics. It will be much harder to scam us or steal our information. Let’s start now. Recognize &amp; Report Phishing Phishing often tries to get us to open a harmful attachment or share personal information. Learn what to look for to avoid the "phish hook."&nbsp; Use Strong Passwords Using strong passwords and a password manager are some easy ways to protect ourselves from someone logging into an account and stealing data or money. Turn on MFA Multifactor authentication means using more than a password to access an app or account. With MFA, we might be asked to enter a text code or use a fingerprint. It makes us much safer from someone accessing our accounts. Update Software Don't delay software updates. Flaws in software can give criminals access to files or accounts. Programmers fix these flaws as soon as they can, but we must install updates for the latest protection! Become a Secure Our World Partner Help CISA increase the security of our nation by partnering with our Secure Our World program. Explore our resources and learn more about how to partner with us. Learn More Secure Our World: Simple Steps to Protect Your Family&nbsp; Secure Our World: Simple Steps to Protect Your Family | Audio Description Secure Our World Resources Learn more about the four ways to stay safe online with Secure Our World Tip Sheets, translated in various languages, and other resources.&nbsp; Secure Our World Resources Secure Our World Videos Watch our videos to learn how to stay safe online.&nbsp; Secure Our World Videos Related Content Secure Yourself &amp; Your Family Quick steps we can all take to greatly increase our safety and protect our money, identity, data and more. Secure Your Business Prevent malicious threats that could cause hassle, financial losses or even business closure. Protect your business, employees and customers! Secure Your Products Adopt Secure by Design practices for your products that reasonably protect against malicious actors and put customer safety first. Cybersecurity Guidance and Resources for High-Risk Communities Digital security tools and tips for civil society organizations and other communities at heightened risk of being targeted by advanced cyber threat actors. Secure Our World Alerts Avoid Scams After Disaster Strikes | CISA Subscribe to Updates from CISA Return to top Topics Spotlight Resources &amp; Tools News &amp; Events Careers About Cybersecurity &amp; Infrastructure Security Agency Facebook X LinkedIn YouTube Instagram RSS CISA Central 1-844-Say-CISA contact@cisa.dhs.gov DHS Seal CISA.gov An official website of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security About CISA Budget and Performance DHS.gov FOIA Requests No FEAR Act Office of Inspector General Privacy Policy Subscribe The White House USA.gov Website Feedback