How to spot scammers claiming to be from the NCSC | National Cyber Security Centre icons/chevron/16px/black Skip to main content Please enable JavaScript in your web browser to get the best experience. Home About NCSC Report an incident Contact us Open Search Menu Advice &amp; guidance Back Advice &amp; guidance Our advice &amp; guidance covers a broad range of topics Find information for... You &amp; your family Small &amp; medium sized organisations Large organisations Self employed &amp; sole traders Public sector Cyber security professionals All advice and guidance articles Popular topics Active Cyber Defence Critical National Infrastructure (CNI) Passwords Phishing All topics Other resources Glossary of terms Infographics Verify an NCSC contact Heightened cyber threat information Cyber Governance for Boards Respond to a cyber attack Back Respond to a cyber attack Resources for individuals and organisations in the UK who have experienced an online scam or cyber attack. Affecting you or your family Overview Hacked account Suspicious messages Lost money online Device behaving strangely View more... Affecting your small business Overview Suspicious messages Hacked account Business payment fraud Infected device View more... Affecting your organisation Overview Ransomware attack Brand impersonation Denial of service (DoS) attack Malware View more... Find a product or service Back Find a product or service Find a range of products &amp; services from NCSC and certified 3rd party suppliers In this section Overview Browse cyber security services NCSC assured services Assuring technology Search assured providers Cyber Essentials Useful links Active Cyber Defence services MyNCSC Education &amp; skills Back Education &amp; skills Working with industry, government and academia to support the next generation of researchers, students and cyber security professionals Find information for... Schools Higher education Professional skills training Working with the NCSC Research &amp; academia Education &amp; academia resources CyberFirst CyberSprinters (7-11 year olds) CyberFirst Navigators (11-14 year olds) Training resources for school staff Resources for higher education institutions Cyber Security Body of Knowledge (CyBOK) Industry &amp; skill resources CYBERUK 2026 NCSC for StartUps Industry 100 Cyber League News Back News All the latest information to help you keep track of what&#039;s happening In this section News Blogs Speeches Reports &amp; advisories Malware analysis reports CYBERUK 2026 Stay up to date Subscribe About NCSC Report an incident Contact us Close Search Search Please enter a search term Search Popular Searches CYBERUK 2026 Artificial intelligence Phishing Training Cyber Assessment Framework Guidance Download & print article PDF Download & print article PDF How to spot scammers claiming to be from the NCSC Check that you're talking to a genuine NCSC employee, and not a criminal. iStock.com/skynesher We have received reports of criminals impersonating NCSC officials in order to scam members of the public. These scams, usually conducted by phone, try and trick people into transferring money, or revealing sensitive information. This page explains: how to verify an NCSC contact how to spot common scams what to do if you think you've been scammed Contact by phone An NCSC official may contact you by phone. You can use the process described below to verify this before taking any further action. However, official NCSC callers will never: ask for your bank details or PIN request you transfer funds to another account ask you to hand over cash or bank cards ask you to pay a fine request passwords or logon details so they can access your computer (or for any other reason) ask you to provide personal details in an email attachment, or on a website ask you to assist in an investigation by doing any of the above (or state that you are committing a crime by not complying) communicate in an abusive, threatening or coercive manner &nbsp; If you do receive a call of this nature,&nbsp;please hang up and report it to Report Fraud. Contact by email An NCSC official may contact you by email. You can use the process described below to verify this before taking any further action. However, official NCSC emails will never: ask for remote access to your computer send unsolicited emails with attached files (especially .zip or Microsoft Office files) ask you for any login details (including passwords) direct you to third party organisations to verify the identity of NCSC staff If you believe you have received a suspicious email, please report it to us . Contact by SMS or WhatsApp An NCSC official will never contact you by text message or WhatsApp (or other instant messaging service). &nbsp; If you receive a message claiming to be from the NCSC, please report it to us .&nbsp;&nbsp; How to verify a contact from the NCSC The NCSC may need to contact you for operational reasons. You can verify that the contact you are speaking to is from the NCSC by using our Verify an NCSC contact service. Go to our Verify an NCSC contact form . Complete the form and click Submit. An NCSC official will reply to verify if the contact is genuine. How to spot scam messages It used to be easier to spot scams. They would often contain bad spelling or grammar, come from an unusual email address, or feature imagery or design that feels ‘off’. But scams are getting smarter and some even fool the experts. For this reason, the NCSC has produced detailed guidance to help you spot and report suspicious messages, emails, web sites and phone calls , but in summary: Scammers try to quickly gain your trust. They aim to pressure you into acting without thinking. If a message or call makes you suspicious, stop, and break the contact. Your bank (or any other official source) will never ask you to supply personal information via email, or call and ask you to confirm your bank account details. If you suspect someone is not who they claim to be, hang up and contact the organisation directly (for example using their official website). If you&#039;ve lost money, or been hacked If you think you may have been a victim of fraud or cyber crime, whether that's from visiting a website, or responding to an email or a text message, you should report it . If you live in England, Wales or Northern Ireland, you can report it to Report Fraud at https://www.reportfraud.police.uk/ or by calling 0300 123 2040 . If you live in Scotland, you can report it to Police Scotland by calling 101 . Topics Personal data Phishing Share and print this article Download & print article PDF Download & print article PDF Share Share Close share options Share on Facebook Share on LinkedIn Share on X Copy Link Published Publish date 30 June 2023 Reviewed 29 May 2024 Version 1.0 Written for Written for You &amp; your family Public sector Small &amp; medium sized organisations Self employed &amp; sole traders Large organisations Cyber security professionals Was this article helpful? Yes the article was helpful No the article was not helpful Close Feedback Form Back to top Share Close share options Share on Facebook Share on LinkedIn Share on X Copy Link Also see News Publish date 9 Nov 2023 Black Friday bargain hunters warned of enhanced online scams after millions lost last year Latest Cyber Aware campaign aims to help shoppers protect themselves online in the run up to the festive period. Guidance The NCSC research problem book The most significant problems which the NCSC believes are in need of concerted and significant collaborative effort from multiple and diverse disciplines over the next decade. News Publish date 14 Nov 2022 NCSC and law enforcement encourage vigilance when shopping online this Christmas Campaign launched to help keep online shoppers more secure in the run up to Christmas. Home Follow us X LinkedIn Instagram Threads RSS About this website Privacy notice Cookies Accessibility Terms &amp; conditions Social media policy Contact the NCSC Report an incident Report suspicious messages or websites Verify an NCSC contact Report a vulnerability Contact the press office Can&#039;t find what you&#039;re looking for? Useful links GCHQ MI5 SIS NPSA GOV.UK