COMET: Learning Cardinality Constrained Mixture of Experts with Trees and Local Search Jump to Content Research Research Who we are Back to Who we are menu Defining the technology of today and tomorrow. Philosophy We strive to create an environment conducive to many different types of research across many different time scales and levels of risk. Learn more about our Philosophy Learn more Philosophy People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Learn more about our People Learn more People Research areas Back to Research areas menu Research areas Explore all research areas Research areas Back to Research areas menu Explore all research areas Foundational ML &amp; Algorithms Algorithms &amp; Theory Data Management Data Mining &amp; Modeling Information Retrieval &amp; the Web Machine Intelligence Machine Perception Machine Translation Natural Language Processing Speech Processing Foundational ML &amp; Algorithms Back to Foundational ML &amp; Algorithms menu Algorithms &amp; Theory Data Management Data Mining &amp; Modeling Information Retrieval &amp; the Web Machine Intelligence Machine Perception Machine Translation Natural Language Processing Speech Processing Computing Systems &amp; Quantum AI Distributed Systems &amp; Parallel Computing Hardware &amp; Architecture Mobile Systems Networking Quantum Computing Robotics Security, Privacy, &amp; Abuse Prevention Software Engineering Software Systems Computing Systems &amp; Quantum AI Back to Computing Systems &amp; Quantum AI menu Distributed Systems &amp; Parallel Computing Hardware &amp; Architecture Mobile Systems Networking Quantum Computing Robotics Security, Privacy, &amp; Abuse Prevention Software Engineering Software Systems Science, AI &amp; Society Climate &amp; Sustainability Economics &amp; Electronic Commerce Education Innovation General Science Health &amp; Bioscience Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization Responsible AI Science, AI &amp; Society Back to Science, AI &amp; Society menu Climate &amp; Sustainability Economics &amp; Electronic Commerce Education Innovation General Science Health &amp; Bioscience Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization Responsible AI Our work Back to Our work menu Projects We regularly open-source projects with the broader research community and apply our developments to Google products. Learn more about our Projects Learn more Projects Publications Publishing our work allows us to share ideas and work collaboratively to advance the field of computer science. Learn more about our Publications Learn more Publications Resources We make products, tools, and datasets available to everyone with the goal of building a more collaborative ecosystem. Learn more about our Resources Learn more Resources Programs &amp; events Back to Programs &amp; events menu Shaping the future, together. Collaborate with us Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. Learn more about our Student programs Learn more Student programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Learn more about our Faculty programs Learn more Faculty programs Conferences &amp; events Connecting with the broader research community through events is essential for creating progress in every aspect of our work. Learn more about our Conferences &amp; events Learn more Conferences &amp; events Collaborate with us Careers Blog Search Home Publications COMET: Learning Cardinality Constrained Mixture of Experts with Trees and Local Search Shibal Ibrahim Wenyu Chen Hussein Hazimeh Natalia Ponomareva Zhe Zhao Rahul Mazumder KDD 2023 (2023) Download Google Scholar Copy Bibtex Abstract The sparse Mixture-of-Experts (Sparse-MoE) framework efficiently scales up model capacity in various domains, such as natural language processing and vision. Sparse-MoEs select a subset of the “experts” (thus, only a portion of the overall network) for each input sample using a sparse, trainable gate. Existing sparse gates are prone to convergence and performance issues when training with first-order optimization methods. In this paper, we introduce two improvements to current MoE approaches. First, we propose a new sparse gate: COMET, which relies on a novel tree-based mechanism. COMET is differentiable, can exploit sparsity to speed up computation, and outperforms state-of-the-art gates. Second, due to the challenging combinatorial nature of sparse expert selection, first-order methods are typically prone to low-quality solutions. To deal with this challenge, we propose a novel, permutation-based local search method that can complement first-order methods in training any sparse gate, e.g., Hash routing, Top-k, DSelect-k, and COMET. We show that local search can help networks escape bad initializations or solutions. We performed large-scale experiments on various domains, including recommender systems, vision, and natural language processing. On standard vision and recommender systems benchmarks, COMET+ (COMET with local search) achieves up to 13% improvement in ROC AUC over popular gates, e.g., Hash routing and Top-k, and up to 9% over prior differentiable gates e.g., DSelect-k. When Top-k and Hash gates are combined with local search, we see up to 100× reduction in the budget needed for hyperparameter tuning. Moreover, for language modeling, our approach improves over the state-of-the-art MoEBERT model for distilling BERT on 5/7 GLUE benchmarks as well as SQuAD dataset. Research Areas Machine Intelligence Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Help Submit feedback &times;