Outrageously Large Neural Networks: The Sparsely-Gated Mixture-of-Experts Layer Jump to Content Research Research Who we are Back to Who we are menu Defining the technology of today and tomorrow. Philosophy We strive to create an environment conducive to many different types of research across many different time scales and levels of risk. Learn more about our Philosophy Learn more Philosophy People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Learn more about our People Learn more People Research areas Back to Research areas menu Research areas Explore all research areas Research areas Back to Research areas menu Explore all research areas Foundational ML &amp; Algorithms Algorithms &amp; Theory Data Management Data Mining &amp; Modeling Information Retrieval &amp; the Web Machine Intelligence Machine Perception Machine Translation Natural Language Processing Speech Processing Foundational ML &amp; Algorithms Back to Foundational ML &amp; Algorithms menu Algorithms &amp; Theory Data Management Data Mining &amp; Modeling Information Retrieval &amp; the Web Machine Intelligence Machine Perception Machine Translation Natural Language Processing Speech Processing Computing Systems &amp; Quantum AI Distributed Systems &amp; Parallel Computing Hardware &amp; Architecture Mobile Systems Networking Quantum Computing Robotics Security, Privacy, &amp; Abuse Prevention Software Engineering Software Systems Computing Systems &amp; Quantum AI Back to Computing Systems &amp; Quantum AI menu Distributed Systems &amp; Parallel Computing Hardware &amp; Architecture Mobile Systems Networking Quantum Computing Robotics Security, Privacy, &amp; Abuse Prevention Software Engineering Software Systems Science, AI &amp; Society Climate &amp; Sustainability Economics &amp; Electronic Commerce Education Innovation General Science Health &amp; Bioscience Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization Responsible AI Science, AI &amp; Society Back to Science, AI &amp; Society menu Climate &amp; Sustainability Economics &amp; Electronic Commerce Education Innovation General Science Health &amp; Bioscience Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization Responsible AI Our work Back to Our work menu Projects We regularly open-source projects with the broader research community and apply our developments to Google products. Learn more about our Projects Learn more Projects Publications Publishing our work allows us to share ideas and work collaboratively to advance the field of computer science. Learn more about our Publications Learn more Publications Resources We make products, tools, and datasets available to everyone with the goal of building a more collaborative ecosystem. Learn more about our Resources Learn more Resources Programs &amp; events Back to Programs &amp; events menu Shaping the future, together. Collaborate with us Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. Learn more about our Student programs Learn more Student programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Learn more about our Faculty programs Learn more Faculty programs Conferences &amp; events Connecting with the broader research community through events is essential for creating progress in every aspect of our work. Learn more about our Conferences &amp; events Learn more Conferences &amp; events Collaborate with us Careers Blog Search Home Publications Outrageously Large Neural Networks: The Sparsely-Gated Mixture-of-Experts Layer Noam Shazeer Azalia Mirhoseini Krzysztof Maziarz Andy Davis Quoc Le Geoffrey Hinton Jeff Dean ICLR (2017) Download Google Scholar Copy Bibtex Abstract The capacity of a neural network to absorb information is limited by its number of parameters. Conditional computation, where parts of the network are active on a per-example basis, has been proposed in theory as a way of dramatically increasing model capacity without a proportional increase in computation. In practice, however, there are significant algorithmic and performance challenges. In this work, we address these challenges and finally realize the promise of conditional computation, achieving greater than 1000x improvements in model capacity with only minor losses in computational efficiency on modern GPU clusters. We introduce a Sparsely-Gated Mixture-of-Experts layer (MoE), consisting of up to thousands of feed-forward sub-networks. A trainable gating network determines a sparse combination of these experts to use for each example. We apply the MoE to the tasks of language modeling and machine translation, where model capacity is critical for absorbing the vast quantities of knowledge available in the training corpora. We present model architectures in which a MoE with up to 137 billion parameters is applied convolutionally between stacked LSTM layers. On large language modeling and machine translation benchmarks, these models achieve significantly better results than state-of-the-art at lower computational cost. Research Areas Machine Intelligence Learn more about how we conduct our research We maintain a portfolio of research projects, providing individuals and teams the freedom to emphasize specific types of work. Our research philosophy Follow us About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Help Submit feedback &times;