--> Aristotle’s Rhetoric (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy) Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Menu Browse Table of Contents What's New Random Entry Chronological Archives About Editorial Information About the SEP Editorial Board How to Cite the SEP Special Characters Advanced Tools Contact Support SEP Support the SEP PDFs for SEP Friends Make a Donation SEPIA for Libraries Entry Navigation Entry Contents Bibliography Academic Tools Friends PDF Preview Author and Citation Info Back to Top Aristotle&rsquo;s Rhetoric First published Thu May 2, 2002; substantive revision Tue Mar 15, 2022 Aristotle&rsquo;s Rhetoric has had an unparalleled influence on the development of the art of rhetoric. In addition to Aristotle&rsquo;s disciples and followers, the so-called Peripatetic philosophers (see Fortenbaugh/Mirhady 1994), famous Roman teachers of rhetoric, such as Cicero and Quintilian, frequently used elements stemming from Aristotle&rsquo;s rhetorical theory. These latter authors, however, were not primarily interested in a meticulous interpretation of Aristotle&rsquo;s writings, but were rather looking for a conceptual framework for their own manuals of rhetoric. This is one of the reasons why for two millennia the interpretation of Aristotelian rhetoric has been pursued by those concerned primarily with the history of rhetoric rather than philosophy. This association with the rhetorical rather than with the philosophical tradition is also mirrored in the fact that in the most influential manuscripts and editions, the text of Aristotle&rsquo;s Rhetoric (for its transmission see Kassel 1971) was surrounded by rhetorical works and speeches written by other Greek and Latin authors, and was thus seldom interpreted in the context of Aristotle&rsquo;s philosophical works. It was not until the last few decades that the philosophically salient features of the Aristotelian rhetoric have been acknowledged (e.g. in the collections Furley/Nehamas 1994 and Rorty 1996; for a more general survey of scholarship in the 20th century see Natali 1994). Most notably, scholars became aware of the fact that Aristotle&rsquo;s rhetorical analysis of persuasion draws on many concepts and ideas that are also treated in his logical, ethical, political and psychological writings, so that the Rhetoric became increasingly perceived as well-integrated part of the Aristotelian oeuvre. For example, Aristotle&rsquo;s Rhetoric is inextricably connected with the history of ancient logic (see Allen 2008 and, more generally, ancient logic ) and is often taken as an important inspiration for modern argumentation theory (see van Eemeren 2013 and, more generally, dialogical logic ). Some authors have stressed the Rhetoric &rsquo;s affinity to Aristotle&rsquo;s ethical theory (see e.g. Woerner 1990), while others were attracted by Aristotle&rsquo;s rhetorical account of metaphor (see e.g. Ricoeur 1996 and, more generally, metaphor ). Most significantly, philosophers and scholars began to turn their attention to the Rhetoric &rsquo;s account of the passions or emotions, which is not only richer than in any other Aristotelian treatise, but was also seen as manifesting an early example of cognitive, judgement-based accounts of emotions (see e.g. Nussbaum 1996, Konstan 2006 and, more generally, &sect;5 of emotion ). 1. Aristotle&rsquo;s Works on Rhetoric 2. The Structure of the Rhetoric 3. Rhetoric as a Counterpart to Dialectic 4. The Nature and Purpose of Rhetoric 4.1 The Definition of Rhetoric 4.2 What Rhetoric Is Useful for 4.3 Can Aristotle&rsquo;s Rhetoric Be Misused? 4.4 Is Aristotle&rsquo;s Conception of Rhetoric Normative? 5. The Three Means of Persuasion 5.1 Persuasion Through the Character of the Speaker 5.2 Persuasion Through the Emotions of the Hearer 5.3 Persuasion Through the Argument Itself 5.4 Is There an Inconsistency in Aristotle&rsquo;s Rhetorical Theory? 6. The Enthymeme 6.1 The Concept of Enthymeme 6.2 Formal Requirements 6.3 Enthymemes as Dialectical Arguments 6.4 The Brevity of the Enthymeme 6.5 Different Types of Enthymemes 7. The Topoi 7.1 The (Lacking) Definition of &lsquo; Topos &rsquo; 7.2 The Word &lsquo; Topos &rsquo; and the Technique of Places 7.3 The Ingredients and the Function of Topoi 7.4 Rhetorical Topoi 8. Style: How to Say Things with Words 8.1 The Virtue of Style 8.2 Aristotelian Metaphors Glossary of Selected Terms Bibliography Translations, Editions and Commentaries Collections Monographs and Articles Academic Tools Other Internet Resources Related Entries Supplements: Judgemental and Non-Judgemental Accounts of Aristotelian Emotions The Thesis that Enthymemes are Relaxed Inferences The Brevity of the Enthymeme The Variety of Topoi in the Rhetoric 1. Aristotle&rsquo;s Works on Rhetoric The work that has come down to us as Aristotle&rsquo;s Rhetoric or Art of Rhetoric consists of three books, while the ancient catalogue of the Aristotelian works, reported e.g. by Diogenes Laertius, mentions only two books on rhetoric (probably our Rhetoric I &amp; II), plus two further books on style (perhaps our Rhetoric III?). Whereas most modern authors agree that at least the core of Rhetoric I &amp; II presents a coherent rhetorical theory, the two themes of Rhetoric III (style/diction and the partition of speeches) are not mentioned in the original agenda of Rhetoric I &amp; II. The conceptual link between Rhetoric I &amp; II and Rhetoric III is not given until the very last sentence of the second book, so the authenticity of this seeming ad hoc connection is slightly suspicious; we cannot rule out the possibility that these two parts of the Rhetoric were not put together until the first complete edition of Aristotle&rsquo;s works was accomplished by Andronicus of Rhodes in the first century. In Aristotle&rsquo;s Poetics (1456a33) we find a cross-reference to a work called &lsquo; Rhetoric &rsquo; which obviously refers only to Rhetoric I &amp; II, but does not seem to include the agenda of Rhetoric III, suggesting that Aristotle at this time regards Rhetoric I &amp; II as the complete work. Regardless of such doubts, the systematic idea that links the two heterogeneous parts of the Rhetoric &mdash; Rhetoric I &amp; II on the one hand and Rhetoric III on the other&mdash; does make good sense: it is not enough, or so the linking passage says, to have a supply of things to say (the so-called &lsquo;thought&rsquo;); one should also know how to express or formulate those things (the so-called &lsquo;style&rsquo;), so that the project of Rhetoric I &amp; II concerning what we say (or the &lsquo;thought&rsquo;) needs to be complemented by the peculiar project of Rhetoric III (i.e. a treatise on &lsquo;style&rsquo;). The chronological fixing of the Rhetoric has turned out to be a delicate and controversial matter. At least the core of Rhetoric I &amp; II seems to be an early work (see e.g. D&uuml;ring 1966, 118&ndash;125, Rist 1989, 85&ndash;86, Rapp 2002 I, 178&ndash;184), written during Aristotle&rsquo;s first stay in Athens (it is unclear, however, which chapters belong to that core; regularly mentioned are the chapters I.4&ndash;15 and II.1&ndash;17). It is true that the Rhetoric also refers to historical events that fall in the time of Aristotle&rsquo;s exile and his second stay in Athens (see &sect; 1 of Aristotle ), but most of them can be found in just two chapters, namely chapters II.23&ndash;24, and moreover such examples could have been updated, which is especially plausible if we assume that the Rhetoric formed the basis of a lecture course held several times. However, what is most striking are its affinities to the early work Topics (for the idea that the Topics is early see e.g. Solmsen 1929, 191&ndash;195; for a discussion of Solmsen&rsquo;s theses in English see Stocks 1933); if, as is widely agreed nowadays, the Topics represents a pre-syllogistic stage of Aristotelian logic, the same is likely to be true of the Rhetoric , as we actually find only few or even no hints to syllogistic inventory in it. (Indeed, the Rhetoric includes two short passages that explicitly refer to the Analytics , which presents Aristotle&rsquo;s syllogistic theory: I.2, 1357a22&ndash;1358a2, II.25, 1402b13&ndash;1403a16. Some authors &mdash; e.g. Solmsen 1929, 13&ndash;31, Burnyeat 1994, 31, Allen 2001, 20&ndash;40 &mdash; take this as evidence that at least in these two passages the Rhetoric makes use of the syllogistic theory, while others &mdash; e.g. Rapp 2002, II 202&ndash;204 &mdash; object to this inference.) It seems that Aristotle was the author not only of the Rhetoric as we know it today, but of several treatises dealing with rhetoric. According to ancient testimonies, Aristotle wrote an early dialogue on rhetoric entitled &lsquo; Grullos &rsquo;, in which he put forward arguments for why rhetoric cannot be an art ( techn&ecirc; ); and since this is precisely the position of Plato&rsquo;s Gorgias (see &sect;4 of Plato: rhetoric and poetry ), the lost dialogue Grullos has traditionally been regarded as a sign of Aristotle&rsquo;s (alleged) early Platonism (see Solmsen 1929, 196&ndash;208). But the evidence for the position defended in this dialogue is too tenuous to support such strong conclusions: it also could have been a &lsquo;dialectical&rsquo; dialogue, simply listing the pros and cons of the thesis that rhetoric is an art (see Lossau 1974). We are in a similar situation concerning another lost work on rhetoric, the so-called &lsquo; Techn&ecirc; Sunagog&ecirc; &rsquo;, a collection of previous theories of rhetoric that is also ascribed to Aristotle. Cicero seems to use this collection, or at least a secondary source relying on it, as his main historical source when he gives a short survey of the history of pre-Aristotelian rhetoric in his Brutus 46&ndash;48. Finally, Aristotle once mentions a work called &lsquo; Theodecteia &rsquo; which has also been supposed to be Aristotelian; but more probably he refers to the rhetorical handbook of his follower Theodectes, who was also a former pupil of Isocrates. From these lost works on rhetoric we only have a meagre collection of scattered fragments (frg. 68&ndash;69 R 3 , 114 R 3 , 125&ndash;141 R 3 : see Rose 1886). 2. The Structure of the Rhetoric The structure of Rhetoric I &amp; II is determined by two tripartite divisions. The first division consists in the distinction between the three pisteis , i.e. &lsquo;persuaders&rsquo; or &lsquo;means of persuasion&rsquo;, that are technical in the sense that they are based on the rhetorical method and are provided by the speech alone. And speech can produce persuasion either through the character ( &ecirc;thos ) of the speaker, the emotional state ( pathos ) of the listener, or the argument ( logos ) itself (see below &sect; 5 ). The second tripartite division concerns the three species or genres of public speech (see de Brauw 2008 and Pepe 2013). A speech that takes place in the assembly is defined as a deliberative speech . In this rhetorical genre, the speaker either advises the audience to do something or warns against doing something. Accordingly, the audience has to judge things that are going to happen in the future, and they have to decide whether these future events are good or bad for the city or city-state ( polis ), whether they will cause advantage or harm. A speech that takes place before a court is defined as a judicial speech . The speaker either accuses somebody or defends herself or someone else. Naturally, this kind of speech treats things that happened in the past. The audience, or rather the jury, has to judge whether a past event actually happened or not and whether it was just or unjust, i.e., whether it was in accordance with the law or contrary to the law. While the deliberative and judicial genres have their context in controversial situations in which the listener has to decide in favour of one of two opposing parties, the third genre does not aim at such a decision: an epideictic speech (e.g. funeral speeches, celebratory speeches) praises or blames somebody, and tries to describe the affairs or deeds of its subject as honourable or shameful. The first book of the Rhetoric treats these three genres in succession. Rhetoric I.4&ndash;8 deals with the deliberative, I.9 with the epideictic, I.10&ndash;14 with the judicial genre. These chapters are understood as contributing to the argumentative mode of persuasion ( logos ) or &mdash; more precisely &mdash; to that part of argumentative persuasion that is specific to the respective genre of speech. The second part of the treatment of argumentative persuasion ( logos ) that is common to all three genres of rhetorical speech is treated in chapters II.19&ndash;26. The second means of persuasion, the one that works by evoking the emotions of the audience ( pathos ), is described in chapters II.2&ndash;11. Although the following chapters II.12&ndash;17 treat different types of character ( &ecirc;thos ), these chapters do not, as one might infer, develop the first means of persuasion, i.e. the one that depends on the character of the speaker. The underlying theory of this means of persuasion is rather unfolded in a few lines of chapter II.1. The aforementioned chapters II.12&ndash;17 rather account for different types of character and their disposition to emotional response, which can be useful for speakers who want to arouse the emotions of the audience. Why the chapters on the specific (in the first book) and the common (in the second book) argumentative means of persuasion ( logos ) are separated by the treatment of emotions and character (in II.2&ndash;17) remains a riddle, especially since the chapter II.18 tries to give a link between the specific and the common aspects of argumentative persuasion &mdash; as though this chapter follows directly upon the end of Rhetoric I. Rhetoric III.1&ndash;12 discusses several questions of style (see below &sect; 8.1 ) while Rhetoric III.13&ndash;19 is dedicated to the various parts of a speech and their arrangement. Owing to ambiguities like these, the structuring of the Rhetoric has always been somewhat controversial, since different attempts to structure the work manifest different interpretative decisions. By and large, though, the following structure seems to capture its main topics and divisions: Rhetoric I Ch. 1: Rhetoric as a counterpart to dialectic &mdash; dialectically conceived rhetoric is centred on proofs &mdash; rhetorical proofs are &lsquo;enthymemes&rsquo; &mdash; this is neglected by previous manuals of rhetoric that focus instead on emotions, slandering and on other techniques for speaking outside the subject &mdash; &ldquo;speaking outside the subject&rdquo; is forbidden in states with good legislation &mdash; the benefits of rhetoric. Ch. 2: Rhetoric is the capacity to discern the available persuasive potential in any given case &mdash; means of persuasion ( pisteis ) based on the art ( techn&ecirc; ) of rhetoric vs. artless means of persuasion &mdash; of the art-based means of persuasion ( pisteis ) there are three types: Through the speaker: credibility of the speaker ( &ecirc;thos ) Through the hearer: the emotional state of the audience ( pathos ) Through the argument: proving or seemingly proving what is true ( logos ) Deductive and inductive types of rhetorical arguments &mdash; the enthymeme as the deductive type of rhetorical argument &mdash; peculiarities of rhetorical arguments &mdash; enthymemes from probabilities and signs &mdash; the technique of topoi &mdash; the difference between generally applicable and specific topoi . Ch. 3: There are three genres of public speech: Judicial (or forensic) speech deals with accusation and defence about past events &mdash; aiming at the just/unjust. Deliberative (or political) speech deals with exhortation and dissuasion about future events &mdash; aiming at the advantageous/harmful. Epideictic speech deals with praise and blame primarily with regard to the present time &mdash; aiming at the honourable/shameful. Ch. 4&ndash;8: Premises or topoi specific to the deliberative speech: Types of advantageous/harmful things the speaker should be familiar with (Ch. 4) &mdash; Happiness ( eudaimonia ) (Ch. 5) &mdash; what is good/advantageous (Ch. 6) &mdash; what is better/more advantageous (Ch. 7) &mdash; the various constitutions (Ch. 8). Ch. 9: Premises or topoi specific to the epideictic speech: virtue and vice &mdash; the honourable and the blameworthy. Ch. 10&ndash;14: Premises or topoi specific to the judicial speech: wrong-doing and motives for wrong-doing (Ch. 10) &mdash; pleasure (Ch. 11) &mdash; the state of mind of the wrong-doers and characteristics of their victims (Ch. 12) &mdash; kinds of just and unjust deeds, unwritten laws (Ch. 13) &mdash; degrees of wrong-doing (Ch. 14). Ch. 15: Artless means of persuasion (i.e. means that cannot be invented by the art, but are just given &mdash; such as contracts, laws, witnesses, oaths, torture &mdash; and need to be used in one way or the other), mostly connected with judicial speech. Rhetoric II Ch. 1: Why persuasion through logos is insufficient &mdash; how persuasion through &ecirc;thos and pathos is supposed to work. Ch. 2&ndash;11: Particular types of emotions ( path&ecirc; ) and their counterparts: anger (Ch. 2) &mdash; mildness (Ch. 3) &mdash; loving/friendly affection ( philia ) and hating (Ch. 4) &mdash; fear and confidence (Ch. 5) &mdash; shame and lack of shame (Ch. 6) &mdash; gratefulness and lack of gratefulness (Ch. 7) &mdash; pity (Ch. 8) &mdash; indignation plus two nameless emotions (Ch. 9) &mdash; envy (Ch. 10) &mdash; emulation or ambition (Ch.11). Ch. 12&ndash;17: Different types of character ( &ecirc;thos ): the character of young people (Ch. 12), of elderly people (Ch. 13), of people in the prime of their life (Ch. 14), of people of noble birth (Ch. 15), of wealthy people (Ch. 16) and of powerful people (Ch. 18). Ch. 18: Transition to generally applicable aspects of persuasion through logos : Ch. 19&ndash;25: Generally applicable aspects of persuasion through logos : topoi about the possible/impossible, past and future facts, significance and insignificance (Ch. 19) &mdash; examples: factual (report) and fictitious (the parable and the fable) (Ch. 20) &mdash; maxims (Ch. 21) &mdash; the enthymeme (Ch. 22) &mdash; topoi for the construction of enthymemes (Ch. 23) &mdash; topoi for the construction of merely apparent (i.e. fallacious) enthymemes (Ch. 24) &mdash; refutation (Ch. 25). Ch. 26: Amplification &mdash; transition to Rhetoric III. Rhetoric III , Ch. 1&ndash;12: Style ( lexis ): Ch. 1: Delivery of a speech and why style/diction should be considered. Ch. 2&ndash;3: The virtue and the vices of prose style: the excellent prose style is neither too banal nor above the due dignity, but appropriate &mdash; the choice of words &mdash; the role of metaphors (Ch. 2) &mdash; Four deterrent factors (or vices) of style (Ch. 3). Ch. 4&ndash;11: Particular ingredients of prose style: the simile (Ch. 4) &mdash; linguistic correctness (Ch. 5) &mdash; stylistic voluminousness and its contrary (Ch. 6) &mdash; appropriateness in style (Ch. 7) &mdash; periodic style (Ch. 8) &mdash; rhythm (Ch. 9) &mdash; urbanity, bringing before the eyes, metaphors (Ch. 10&ndash;11). Ch. 12: Written and oral style. Rhetoric III , Ch. 13&ndash;19: Arrangement ( taxis ): Ch. 13: Only two parts of the speech are necessary, namely the statement and the proof of the main claim &mdash; contemporary authors of rhetorical manuals make futile subdivisions of the parts of speech &mdash; introduction of a quadripartite scheme of the speech: (1) proem, (2) statement of the main claim, (3) proof of the stated claim ( pistis ), (4) epilogue. Ch. 14&ndash;19: Particular parts of the speech: the proem in the three genres of speech (Ch. 14) &mdash; topoi for slandering (Ch. 15) &mdash; narration (Ch. 16) &mdash; proof ( pistis ) (Ch. 17) &mdash; interrogation (Ch. 18) &mdash; epilogue/conclusion (Ch. 19). 3. Rhetoric as a Counterpart to Dialectic Aristotle stresses right from the beginning of his Rhetoric that rhetoric is closely related to dialectic. He offers several formulations to describe the affinity between these two disciplines: in the first line of the book Rhetoric rhetoric is said to be a &lsquo;counterpart&rsquo; ( antistrophos ) to dialectic ( Rhet. I.1, 1354a1); in the second chapter of the first book it is also called an &lsquo;outgrowth&rsquo; or &lsquo;offshoot&rsquo; ( paraphues ti ) of dialectic and the study of character ( Rhet. I.2, 1356a25f.); finally, Aristotle says that rhetoric is part of dialectic and resembles it ( Rhet. I.2, 1356a30f.). In saying that rhetoric is a counterpart to dialectic, Aristotle obviously wants to allude to Plato&rsquo;s Gorgias (464bff.), where rhetoric is ironically defined as a counterpart to cookery in the soul. Since, in this passage, Plato uses the word &lsquo; antistrophos &rsquo; to indicate an analogy, it is likely that Aristotle wants to express a kind of analogy too: what dialectic is for the (private or academic) practice of attacking and maintaining an argument, rhetoric is for the (public) practice of defending oneself or accusing an opponent. The notion of &lsquo;dialectic&rsquo; is prominent in the work of Aristotle&rsquo;s teacher, Plato; Plato often labels his philosophical method, or certain parts of it, as dialectic. In his dialogue Gorgias (see &sect;4 of Plato: rhetoric and poetry ), dialectic seems to be strictly opposed to rhetoric, the former aiming at the disclosure of truth, the latter allegedly aiming at &lsquo;persuasion without knowledge&rsquo;. In his Phaedrus Plato pictures the relation between dialectic and rhetoric in a different way (see &sect;5.1 of Plato: rhetoric and poetry ); here he entertains the idea of a new philosophical rhetoric, quite different from the then contemporary style of speech writing, which rests upon dialectic, the genuine philosophical method, for acquiring genuine knowledge both of the subject matter of a speech and of the soul of the audience. When Aristotle speaks of dialectic, he certainly has his book Topics in mind, where he develops at some length an argumentative method for attacking and defending theses of any content (see &sect;8 of Aristotle: logic ). Clearly, Aristotle&rsquo;s dialectical method was inspired by Plato and by the debates in Plato&rsquo;s Academy; however, while Plato often presents dialectic as a method for discovering and conveying truth, Aristotelian dialectic is strictly confined to examining particular claims or testing the consistency of a set of propositions (which in his view is different from establishing or proving the truth of a proposition). This is, in a nutshell, the context that must be kept in mind, when Aristotle presents &mdash; quite allusively &mdash; a new art of rhetoric by stressing its affinity to dialectic; obviously he plays upon his readers&rsquo; expectations concerning the meaning of dialectic and the relation between dialectic and rhetoric, as described by Plato. Those students of Plato&rsquo;s Academy who were still suspicious about any engagement with rhetoric and public speech possibly received the opening of Aristotle&rsquo;s Rhetoric with its postulated affinity between rhetoric and dialectic either as a provoction or as some sort of joke. This purported analogy between rhetoric and dialectic (as conceived by Aristotle) can be substantiated by several common features of both disciplines: Both rhetoric and dialectic are concerned with things that do not belong to a definite genus or are not the object of a specific science. Both rhetoric and dialectic are not dependent on the established principles of specific sciences. Both rhetoric and dialectic have the function of providing arguments. Both rhetorical and dialectical arguments rely on assumptions or premises that are not established as true, b