--> Ancient Atomism (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy) Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Menu Browse Table of Contents What's New Random Entry Chronological Archives About Editorial Information About the SEP Editorial Board How to Cite the SEP Special Characters Advanced Tools Contact Support SEP Support the SEP PDFs for SEP Friends Make a Donation SEPIA for Libraries Entry Navigation Entry Contents Bibliography Academic Tools Friends PDF Preview Author and Citation Info Back to Top Ancient Atomism First published Tue Aug 23, 2005; substantive revision Tue Oct 18, 2022 A number of philosophical schools in different parts of the ancient world held that the universe is composed of some kind of &lsquo;atoms&rsquo; or minimal parts, albeit for different reasons. Although the modern term &lsquo;atom&rsquo; derives from the ancient Greek adjective atomos , which literally means &lsquo;uncuttable&rsquo;, it is possible that the first theories we can describe as atomist were developed in classical Indian philosophy. While the ancient Greeks from whom we derive the modern term were theorizing about the fundamental constituents of the natural world, philosophical discussions have embraced various forms of minima, indivisible units or building blocks. Scholarly uses of the term &lsquo;atomism&rsquo; range over mereological theories in widely different contexts (Zilioli 2021); not all possible senses of the term are discussed here. Several ancient atomist theories are treated in more depth in other articles in this encyclopedia: the reader is referred to individual entries for detailed discussions by the relevant experts (see the list of related entries at the end of this article). The term &lsquo;atomism&rsquo; is sometimes understood to refer to theories explaining changes in the material world by the rearrangements of minute particles of matter, or to the idea that any kind of magnitude&mdash;geometrical extension, time and space&mdash;is composed of indivisible parts. Theories of mathematical minima were formulated in response to paradoxes like those of Zeno of Elea (early 5 th c. BCE) about infinite divisibility of magnitudes. However, theories of smallest parts could be introduced for reasons quite distinct from mathematical problems about divisibility: atomism in classical Indian philosophy seems to have been motivated by the desire to reflect the categories used in analysis of the metaphysical structure of reality shown in language (Carpenter 2021). While in the Greek tradition, atoms were held to be eternal and indestructible particles that persist through changes in the visible world of experience, that is not always a feature of ancient atomist theories. Some Indian philosophical systems held that atoms are created and subject to transformation or destruction, or that they are only momentary features of experience. Atomists from monotheistic schools&mdash;including medieval Islamic kal&#257;m philosophers and seventeenth century figures like Pierre Gassendi&mdash;adapted atomist theories to allow for the creation and destruction of atoms by God. Some scholars (Pyle 1997) treat a particular strand of atomist thought as an ideal type, yet the diversity of atomist thought seems to belie this stricture (L&uuml;thy, Murdoch and Newman 2001). The interactions of particles too small to observe is a compelling way to account for perceptible changes in the natural world. Even Aristotle&mdash;often cast as the arch-enemy of atomism&mdash;allowed that there might be a lower limit to the quantity of matter that could instantiate certain properties. But not all atomist theories were based on an appearance/reality distinction: Buddhist philosophers posited phenomenal instants with minimum extension in time as well as space, to mirror the ephemerality of moments of human experience. Void spaces between atoms sometimes, but not always, feature in atomist theories. 1. Atomism in Classical Indian Philosophy 1.1 Ny&#257;ya-Vai&#347;e&#7779;ika atomism 1.2 Buddhist atomist theories 1.3 Jaina atomism 2. Ancient Greek Atomism 2.1 Leucippus and Democritus 2.2 Plato, Platonists and Pythagoreans 2.3 Minima Naturalia in Aristotelian Thought 2.4 Diodorus Cronus 2.5 Epicurean Atomism 2.6 Atomism and Particle Theories in Ancient Greek Sciences 3. The Legacy of Ancient Atomism 3.1 Atomism in the Islamic World 3.2 Ancient Greek Atomism in Later European Philosophy 3.3 Early Modern Indian Atomism Bibliography General Atomism in Classical Indian Philosophy Leucippus and Democritus Plato, Platonists and Pythagoreans Minima Naturalia in Aristotelian Thought Diodorus Cronus Epicurean Atomism Atomism and Particle Theories in Ancient Greek Sciences Atomism in the Islamic World Ancient Greek Atomism in Later European Philosophy Early Modern Indian Atomism Academic Tools Other Internet Resources Related Entries 1. Atomism in Classical Indian Philosophy The beginnings of atomism in classical Indian philosophy are difficult to ascertain, but it likely has origins several centuries before the common era. Two distinct systems that regard Vedic texts as authoritative, Ny&#257;ya and Vai&#347;e&#7779;ika, favoured atomist accounts of the material world. Quite different atomist theories are found in Buddhist and Jaina systems. Other Indian philosophical systems were critical of atomism, arguing instead for an idealist account of experience. The Buddhist philosopher Vasubandhu (5th c. CE), whose earlier Treasury of Metaphysics is often considered an atomist account, critiqued atomism in his Twenty Verses . The terms translated &lsquo;atom&rsquo; in Indian philosophy ( a&#7751;u , param&#257;&#7751;u ) refer primarily to the smallness of parts (Gangopadhyaya 1980): this notion of smallness, found in the Upanishads, was developed into atomist theories in the commentary tradition. A classic argument for atomism reasons by analogy from the fact that perceptible objects seem to be composed of parts (Chatterjee 2017). Yet, the argument ran, bodies cannot be infinitely divisible because this would lead to the paradoxical result that a mountain and a mustard seed would be equal in size. This rebuttal&mdash;closely echoed in Islamic debates&mdash;is based on the kind of paradox about summation of infinite series also found in the ancient Greek tradition (Bhaduri 1947, 55). The comparison of mountain and mustard seed was also deployed to argue that the concepts of small and large would be indistinguishable unless smallness had a defined magnitude (Gangopadhyaya 1980, 29). Not all Indian atomist theories regard minima as substantial entities. Carpenter (2021) describes the trope theory of Vasubandhu as &lsquo;absolute atomism&rsquo;: this characterization challenges the notion that atomism canonically centres on the positing of enduring particles. Instead, the focus is on minimal units in time as well as space, which are simultaneously minimal components of ontological units and not substance-attribute composites. A tradition that the Greek atomist Democritus was acquainted with the ideas of the &lsquo;gymnosophists&rsquo; or &lsquo;naked wise men&rsquo; of India is difficult to authenticate. Claims that Indian atomism was shaped by Greek influences (Keith 1921, 17) are uncommon in recent scholarship. The possibility that Islamic atomism was impacted by debates in classical Indian philosophy has been more extensively considered, particularly given parallel arguments and the shared view that atoms never exist in isolation (Pines 1997; Wolfson 1976). Another feature common to both traditions is a willingness to ascribe sensible qualities to atoms, in contrast to Greek atomist theories. Indian Buddhist scholars introduced atomist theories to China from the second century CE onward, but they seem not to have been adopted into ancient Chinese natural philosophy (Needham 1969, 22). 1.1 Ny&#257;ya-Vai&#347;e&#7779;ika atomism The Ny&#257;ya and Vai&#347;e&#7779;ika systems developed separately, the former focusing on epistemological issues and the latter on ontology. Nonetheless, there were enough overlap and later reconciliations between them that scholars often consider their picture of the natural world together. Both schools developed as traditions of commentary on the Upanishads, dating back to 800 BCE (Phillips 1995). In contrast to the Buddhist tradition, atoms in these systems of thought were regarded as external material substances that persist through change, although&mdash;in line with the teachings of the Vedic scriptures&mdash;the atoms were thought to be created. Important figures in the textual tradition include Ka&#7751;&#257;da, regarded as founder of the Vai&#347;e&#7779;ika school; Pr&aacute;sastap&#257;da, author of the first surviving commentary; Gautama (ca. 150 CE); V&#257;tsy&#257;yana (ca. 400 CE). The work of Udayana (11th c. CE) and Ga&ntilde;ge&#347;a (c. 1325 CE) gave rise to a new school, Navya- Ny&#257;ya, that largely merged the two traditions (Matilal 1977; Phillips 1995; Ganeri 2019). Ny&#257;ya-Vai&#347;e&#7779;ika atomism developed in constant dialogue with other Indian philosophical schools: in a context where Buddhism offered a compelling narrative of personal salvation through detachment from the unrealities of the experienced world, some Hindu philosophers responded by bolstering their case for the realism of the experienced world, and real atomic substances were invoked to explain both mental and physical events (Ganeri 2011, 167&ndash;8). The idea that experienced properties inhere in real external substances was used to account for intersubjective agreement about the external world. The Ny&#257;ya-Vai&#347;e&#7779;ika theory posited different kinds of atoms for each of the elements earth, water, air and fire, in contrast to the Jaina theory that there is a single homogenous matter out of which everything is composed (Gangopadhyaya 1980). Atoms were regarded as substances and bearers of different attributes. Different clusters of properties were ascribed to atoms of different kinds (Dasgupta 1987; Chatterjee 2017). In contrast to the Greek atomists, who denied that sensible properties really inhere in atoms at all, atoms of different elements are thought to have perceptible properties, such as cold for water atoms. Some theorists allow for the possibility of altering the fundamental properties of atoms by heating (Thakar 2003). For atomists in the Ny&#257;ya-Vai&#347;e&#7779;ika systems, who held that the atoms are made of fundamentally different matter, there is a problem of explaining how properties of one kind of atom can affect an atom of a different kind, i.e. how the viscosity of water atoms is able to combine with earth atoms and to change their consistency (Gangopadhyaya 1980, 34). Atoms combine into dyads and triads before they aggregate into bodies of a kind that can be perceived. The theory however faced a question how atoms can combine, if they are indeed partless: unless we can distinguish different parts to an atom, it is difficult to see how they can be said to be next to one another&mdash;side by side&mdash;any more than mathematical points can be said to join together rather than collapsing into a single point. The response is to deny the analogy to points, since atoms are tangible entities and two of them cannot occupy the same place (Bhaduri 1947, 63), thus atoms do not lose their identity when they aggregate. Another approach to the problem is due to Vasubandhu in the Buddhist tradition (see Carpenter 2021). Ny&#257;ya-Vai&#347;e&#7779;ika atomism also faced the challenge that their theory was only based on logical inference and could not be confirmed by experience (Bhaduri 1947, 58). In the atomism of Gautama, recognizing the reality of composites is important to secure the basis for knowledge, since atoms themselves are too small to be seen. V&#257;tsy&#257;yana supports this conclusion empirically, pointing out that a forest may be visible from a distance where the individual trees are not (Sarkar 2021). In an ongoing controversy with Buddhist philosophers over the reality of composite entities, Ny&#257;ya atomists denied that we are aware of composites only indirectly or by means of awareness of individual parts (Matilal 1986, 268). Ny&#257;ya and Vai&#347;e&#7779;ika atomists held that the world was created when order was imposed on pre-existing matter: the motion of atoms was ascribed to a divine source. Their analysis of motion and its causes employs concepts that have been compared to modern notions of force (Kumar 2019). Although the systems had naturalistic leanings, unusual motions such as the action of a magnet might be ascribed&mdash;as it was in the European middle ages&mdash;to the moral condition of human agents (Matilal 1977, 58). The organization of atoms was cited as a proof for the existence of God by the 11th century CE atomist Udayana (Gangopadhyaya 1980, 36). The mind and self or soul&mdash;like time and space&mdash;was regarded as a distinct category from material elements, a distinction traced back to the classical scriptures. 1.2 Buddhist atomist theories Developed in the centuries after the Buddha (6th c. BCE), Buddhist philosophies, especially the Abhidhamma school, systematized the underlying philosophy of a body of texts that focused on human lived experience. The entities in Buddhist theory that are considered atomistic are not substances but momentary events, dharmas or dhammas : &lsquo;the constituents of sentient experience, the irreducible &ldquo;building blocks&rdquo; that make up one&rsquo;s world&rsquo; (Ronkin 2005, 41). These atomic particulars can be mental or physical, and have been compared to trope theories or process metaphysics in contemporary scholarship. Unlike theories of atomic substances, Buddhist atoms are not composed of multiple properties. In contrast to Ny&#257;ya-Vai&#347;e&#7779;ika atomists, Buddhists deny that there is an underlying substance uniting different properties like the colour and the weight of a jar (Bhaduri 1947). Atomic property-instances do not occur in isolation, any more than nouns and verbs made sense alone. Despite the phenomenological character that atoms sometimes bear in Buddhist thought, questions about compositionality occur which parallel issues in other ancient atomist theories (Goodman 2004, Carpenter 2021). Vai&#347;e&#7779;ika thought&mdash;which accepted categories like substance and soul&mdash;impacted the articulation of Abhidhamma ontology, an articulation that sometimes led to charges of &lsquo;ontologization,&rsquo; i.e. of moving away from the experiential focus of Buddhist thought towards a more systematic metaphysics (Ronkin 2005). Material atoms are first found in Buddhist thought in the work of Dharmasri (2nd c. CE), and feature in the work of Vasubandhu and Sanghabhadra (both 5th c. CE) (Ronkin 2005, 56). Buddhist versions of atomism differ from Ny&#257;ya-Vai&#347;e&#7779;ika versions on the status of the wholes composed of atoms, with the former treating composites as mere aggregates, the latter regarding them as distinct entities in their own right (Sarkar 2021). The Buddhist emphasis on the transitory nature of material reality was part of the motivation for their interest in atomist explanations (Gangopadhyaya 1980, 52; Ronkin 2005, 59). In the enumeration of different kinds of mental states, notions that correspond to materiality are included, although earth, water, wind and fire are typically considered to be merely mental constructs in Buddhist thought. Atoms were nonetheless used in materialist explanations, which account for physical phenomena such as the combination of different elements to form macroscopic materials. Because we appear to see visible particles of dust, or rays of light shining on glass or mirrors, it seemed reasonable to suppose that interactions too small to perceive produce observed changes in the macroscopic world (Dasgupta 1987). Heat and light were thought to be produced by minute corpuscles entering other bodies. Buddhist atomism regarded atomic properties such as solidity, heat and motion as producing perceptible changes at the macroscopic level (Gangopadhyaya 1980, 13&ndash;14). Even with non-material atoms, the question of their occupation of space was considered: Matilal suggests that tangibility may have been regarded as a latent property of the atoms, which emerges like visibility when they cluster (Matilal 1986, 361). Different Buddhist schools disagreed on the answer to these questions. Problems about the possibility of motion, developed especially by the Buddhist N&#257;g&#257;rjuna (2nd c. CE), prompted responses in other schools of thought (Matilal 1977, 79; Dasgupta 1987). Although the persistence of macroscopic bodies might be illusory, there were discussions about the momentum or persisting tendencies of moving bodies, the different directions exhibited by these tendencies in a rotating wheel, and the cohesion of particles within moving bodies. 1.3 Jaina atomism Jaina atomist theory treats matter, space and time as composed of indivisible smallest parts (Pines 1987). Although natural philosophy may not have occupied a large role in Jaina thought, the reason for positing atoms is as the ultimate cause of perceived physical qualities (Nyayavijayaji 1998). They posited a homogenous matter out of which every material body is composed, in contrast to the atomism of the Ny&#257;ya-Vai&#347;e&#7779;ika and Buddhist systems, which posited atoms of different kinds for each of the elements earth, water, fire and air (Gangopadhyaya 1980). Atoms thus bring different properties to aggregates, as, for example, the addition of water atoms causes earth atoms to stick together (Dasgupta 1987). The tendency of atoms to cohere into aggregates was thought to come from their own nature and not from external pressures (Nyayavijayaji 1998). Jaina atomists also regarded soul as a distinct kind of entity, although they held that material atoms can percolate into soul and affect it. Space was also treated as a distinct kind of substance (Mehta 1954). Jaina tradition claims to have been the oldest atomist system and to have inspired Vai&#347;e&#7779;ika atomism, although recent scholarship suggests that the reverse is true (Matilal 1977, 60; Thakar 2003, 7&ndash;8, 450). 2. Ancient Greek Atomism Ancient Greek atomists developed a systematic and comprehensive natural philosophy accounting for the origins of everything from the interaction of indivisible bodies, as these atoms&mdash;which have only a few intrinsic properties like size and shape&mdash;strike against one another, rebound and interlock in an infinite void. In both its Democritean and its Epicurean versions, Greek atomism eschewed teleological explanation and denied divine intervention or design, regarding every composite of atoms as produced purely by material interactions of bodies, and accounting for the perceived properties of macroscopic bodies as produced by these same atomic interactions. Ancient Greek atomists formulated views on ethics, theology, political philosophy and epistemology consistent with this physical system. This powerful and consistent materialism was regarded by Aristotle as a chief competitor to teleological natural philosophy; following his criticisms, the theory was reformulated by Epicurus and had a second life as the philosophy of a school devoted to the pursuit of tranquillity and a communal life of simple pleasures. 2.1 Leucippus and Democritus Leucippus (5th c. BCE) is usually credited with inventing atomism in the Greek tradition. According to a passing remark by the geographer Strabo, Posidonius (1 st c. BCE Stoic philosopher) reported that ancient Greek atomism can be traced back to a figure known as Moschus or Mochus of Sidon, who lived at the time of the Trojan wars. This report was given credence in the seventeenth century: the Cambridge Platonist Henry More traced the origins of ancient atomism back, via Pythagoras and Moschus, to Moses. This theologically motivated view appealed to those who saw revelation as the source of all truth and wanted to trace ancient Greek ideas to Biblical sources. An ancient Greek source commenting on the travels of Democritus credits his mathematical interests to time spent among Egyptian geometers and suggests that he may have learned from the philosophers of India. In 1877, Tann&eacute;ry argued that Zeno of Elea&rsquo;s arguments about divisibility would make most sense if formulated in response to an atomist theory supposedly held by some early Pythagoreans. Tann&eacute;ry&rsquo;s thesis has been thoroughly challenged since then: most scholars instead consider atomism to be one of a number of positions formulated in response to the arguments of Parmenides and Zeno (first half of the fifth century). Little is known about Leucippus, while the ideas of his student Democritus&mdash;who is said to have taken over and systematized his teacher&rsquo;s theory&mdash;are known from a large number of reports and fragments quoted by others. These early atomists theorized that the two fundamental and oppositely characterized constituents of the natural world are indivisible bodies&mdash;atoms&mdash;and void. The latter is described simply as nothing, or as the negation of being. Atoms were said to be intrinsically unchangeable; they can move about in the void and combine into different clusters, which give rise to the macroscopic bodies of the perceived world. Because all macroscopic objects are in fact combinations of atoms, everything in the world of our experience is transitory and subject to dissolution while the atoms themselves persist through all time. According to Aristotle&rsquo;s presentation ( On Generation and Corruption I 8), the motivation for the first postulation of indivisible bodies is to answer a metaphysical puzzle about the possibility of change and multiplicity. Parmenides had argued that any differentiation or change in Being implies that &lsquo;what is not&rsquo; either is or comes to be. Although there are problems in interpreting Parmenides&rsquo; precise meaning, he was understood to have raised a problem about how change can be possible without something coming from nothing. Several Presocratics formulated, in response, philosophical systems in which change is not considered to require something coming into being from complete nonexistence, but rather the arrangement of pre-existing elements into new combinations. The atomists held that, the atoms are unchangeable and contain no internal differentiation of a sort that would allow for division. By positing indivisible bodies, the atomists were also thought to be answering Zeno&rsquo;s paradoxes about the impossibility of motion. Zeno had argued that, if magnitudes can be divided to infinity, it would be impossible for motion to occur. The problem seems to be that a body moving would have to traverse an infinite number of spaces in a finite time. By supposing that the atoms form the lowest limit to division, the atomists escape from this dilemma: a total space traversed has only a finite number of parts. As it is unclear whether the earliest atomists understood the atoms to be physically or theoretically indivisible, they may not have made the distinction. Makin&rsquo;s argument that atomic indivisibility is based on the homogeneity of substance and not smallness explains why Democritus allowed for the possibility of even very large atoms (Makin 1993, 55). Atoms can differ in size, shape, order and position; they move about in the void, and&mdash;depending on their shape&mdash;some can temporarily bond with one another by means of tiny hooks and barbs on their surfaces. Thus the shape of individual atoms affects the macroscopic texture of clusters of atoms, which may be fluid and yielding or firm and resistant, depending on the amount of void space between and the coalescence of the atomic shapes. The texture of surface