--> Charles Sanders Peirce (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy) Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Menu Browse Table of Contents What's New Random Entry Chronological Archives About Editorial Information About the SEP Editorial Board How to Cite the SEP Special Characters Advanced Tools Contact Support SEP Support the SEP PDFs for SEP Friends Make a Donation SEPIA for Libraries Entry Navigation Entry Contents Bibliography Academic Tools Friends PDF Preview Author and Citation Info Back to Top Charles Sanders Peirce First published Fri Jun 22, 2001; substantive revision Thu Feb 11, 2021 Charles Sanders Peirce (1839&ndash;1914) was the founder of American pragmatism (after about 1905 called by Peirce &ldquo;pragmaticism&rdquo; in order to differentiate his views from those of William James, John Dewey, and others, which were being labelled &ldquo;pragmatism&rdquo;), a theorist of logic, language, communication, and the general theory of signs (which was often called by Peirce &ldquo;semeiotic&rdquo;), an extraordinarily prolific logician (mathematical and general), and a developer of an evolutionary, psycho-physically monistic metaphysical system. Practicing geodesy and chemistry in order to earn a living, he nevertheless considered scientific philosophy, and especially logic, to be his true calling, his real vocation. In the course of his polymathic researches, he wrote voluminously on an exceedingly wide range of topics, ranging from mathematics, mathematical logic, physics, geodesy, spectroscopy, and astronomy, on the one hand (that of mathematics and the physical sciences), to psychology, anthropology, history, and economics, on the other (that of the humanities and the social sciences). 1. Brief Biography 2. Difficulty of Access to Peirce&rsquo;s Writings 3. Deduction, Induction, and Abduction 4. Pragmatism, Pragmaticism, and the Scientific Method 5. Anti-determinism, Tychism, and Evolutionism 6. Synechism, the Continuum, Infinites, and Infinitesimals 7. Probability, Verisimilitude, and Plausibility 8. Psycho-physical Monism and Anti-nominalism 9. Triadism and the Universal Categories 10. Mind and Semeiotic 11. Semeiotic and Logic 12. The Classification of the Sciences 13. Logic 14. Peirce&rsquo;s Reduction Thesis 15. Contemporary Practical Application of Peirce&rsquo;s Ideas 16. Significant Students of Peirce Bibliography Academic Tools Other Internet Resources Related Entries 1. Brief Biography Charles Sanders Peirce was born on September 10, 1839 in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and he died on April 19, 1914 in Milford, Pennsylvania. His writings extend from about 1857 until near his death, a period of approximately 57 years. His published works run to about 12,000 printed pages and his known unpublished manuscripts run to about 80,000 handwritten pages. The topics on which he wrote have an immense range, from mathematics and the physical sciences at one extreme, to economics, psychology, and other social sciences at the other extreme. Peirce&rsquo;s father Benjamin Peirce was Professor of Mathematics at Harvard University and was one of the founders of, and for a while a director of, the U. S. Coast and Geodetic Survey as well as one of the founders of the Smithsonian Institution. The department of mathematics at Harvard was essentially built by Benjamin. From his father, Charles Sanders Peirce received most of the substance of his early education as well as a good deal of intellectual encouragement and stimulation. Benjamin&rsquo;s didactic technique mostly took the form of setting interesting problems for his son and checking Charles&rsquo;s solutions to them. In this challenging instructional atmosphere Charles acquired his lifelong habit of thinking through philosophical and scientific problems entirely on his own. To this habit, perhaps, is to be attributed Charles Peirce&rsquo;s considerable originality. Peirce graduated from Harvard in 1859 and received the bachelor of science degree in chemistry in 1863, graduating summa cum laude . Except for his remarkable marks in chemistry Peirce was a poor student, typically in the bottom third of his class. Obviously, the standard curriculum bored him, so that he mostly avoided doing seriously its required work. For thirty-two years, from 1859 until the last day of 1891, he was employed by the U. S. Coast and Geodetic Survey, mainly surveying and carrying out geodetic investigations. Some of this work Peirce undertook simply to finance his diurnal existence (and that of his first wife Melusina (Zina) Fay), while he devoted the main force of his thinking to abstract logic. Nevertheless, the geodetic tasks involved making careful measurements of the intensity of the earth&rsquo;s gravitational field by means of using swinging pendulums. The pendulums that Peirce used were often of his own design. For over thirty years, then, Peirce was involved in practical and theoretical problems associated with making very accurate scientific measurements. This practical involvement in physical science was crucial in his ultimately coming to reject scientific determinism, as we shall see. From 1879 until 1884, Peirce maintained a second job teaching logic in the Department of Mathematics at Johns Hopkins University. During that period the Department of Mathematics was headed by the famous mathematician J. J. Sylvester, whom Peirce had met earlier through his father Benjamin. This teaching period also was characterized by Peirce&rsquo;s having several students who made names for themselves in their own right. Among these were Oscar Howard Mitchell, Allan Marquand, Benjamin Ives Gilman, Joseph Jastrow, Fabian Franklin, Christine Ladd (later, after having married Fabian Franklin, Christine Ladd-Franklin), Thorstein Veblen, and John Dewey. Brief commentary will be offered at the end of this essay on three of these figures: John Dewey, Oscar Howard Mitchell, and Christine Ladd. It is sometimes said that William James was also one of Peirce&rsquo;s students, but this claim is erroneous: it conflates the fact of James&rsquo;s being an old and a close friend of Peirce, as well as being a fellow-member with Peirce in the so-called &ldquo;Metaphysical Club&rdquo; in Cambridge, Massachusetts, with the non-fact of James&rsquo;s being a student of Peirce at Johns Hopkins University along with John Dewey and others. Peirce&rsquo;s teaching job at Johns Hopkins was suddenly terminated for reasons that are apparently connected with the fact that Peirce&rsquo;s second wife (Juliette Annette Froissy, a.k.a. Juliette Annette Pourtalai) was Romani, moreover a Roma with whom Peirce had more or less openly cohabited before marriage and before his divorce from his first wife Zina. (In fact Peirce obtained his divorce from Zina only two days before marrying Juliette.) The Johns Hopkins position was Peirce&rsquo;s only academic employment, and after losing it Peirce worked thereafter only for the U. S. Coast and Geodetic Survey (and constructing entries for the Century Dictionary ) and writing book reviews for the Nation . The government employment came to an end the last day of 1891, ultimately because of funding objections to pure research (and perhaps also to Peirce&rsquo;s extravagant spending and to his procrastination in finishing his required reports) that were generated in an ever-practical-minded Congress. Thereafter, Peirce often lived on the edge of penury, eking out a living doing intellectual odd-jobs (such as translating or writing occasional pieces) and carrying out consulting work (mainly in chemical engineering and analysis). For the remainder of his life, except for money inherited from his mother and aunt, Peirce was often in dire financial straits; sometimes he managed to survive only because of the overt or covert charity of relatives or friends, for example that of his old friend William James. In his youth Peirce was amazingly precocious, and he began to study logic seriously at an extraordinarily early age. According to noted Peirce scholar Max Fisch in his&ldquo;Introduction&rdquo; to Volume 1 of The Writings of Charles S. Peirce: A Chronological Edition , p. xviii, Peirce&rsquo;s introduction to and first immersion in the study of logic came in 1851 within a week or two of his turning 12 years of age. Remembering the occasion in 1910, in his &ldquo;Note on the Doctrine of Chances,&rdquo; in Collected Papers of Charles S. Peirce , Volume II, Section 408 (hereinafter such Collected Papers references will be cited as CP , 2.408), Peirce himself remembered the crucial event as having occurred in 1852, when he was 13 years old. Regardless of his exact age, at the time of the event Charles encountered and then over a period of at most a few days studied and absorbed a standard textbook of the time on logic by Bishop Richard Whately. Having become fascinated by logic, he began to think of all issues as problems in logic. During his freshman year at college (Harvard), in 1855, when he was 16 years old, he and a friend began private study of philosophy in general, starting with Schiller&rsquo;s Letters on the Aesthetic Education of Man and continuing with Kant&rsquo;s Critique of Pure Reason . Schiller&rsquo;s distinction among the three basic human drives of Stofftrieb , Formtrieb , and Spieltrieb Peirce never forgot or renounced, and it became the basis for Peirce&rsquo;s distinction between the man of practical affairs, the man of scientific activity, and the man of aesthetic practice. By Kant Peirce was initially more or less repelled. After three years of intense study of Kant, Peirce concluded that Kant&rsquo;s system was vitiated by what he called its &ldquo;puerile logic,&rdquo; and about the age of 19 he formed the fixed intention of devoting his life to the study of and to research in logic. It was, however, impossible at that time, as indeed Peirce&rsquo;s father Benjamin informed him, to earn a living as a research logician; and Peirce described himself at the time of his graduation from Harvard in 1859, just short of his 20th birthday, as wondering &ldquo;what I would do in life.&rdquo; Within two years, however, he had more or less resolved his problem. During those two years he had worked as an Aid on the Coast Survey, in Maine and Louisiana, then had returned to Cambridge and had studied natural history and natural philosophy at Harvard. He said of himself that in 1861 he &ldquo;No longer wondered what I would do in life but defined my object.&rdquo; It is evident that his adoption of the profession of chemistry and his practice of geodesy allowed Charles both to support himself (and before long also his first wife Zina) and to continue to engage in researches on logic. From the early 1860s until his death in 1914 his output in logic was voluminous and varied. One of his logical systems became the basis for Ernst Schroeder&rsquo;s great three-volume treatise on logic, the Vorlesungen ueber die Algebra der Logik . Peirce, then, had early and deep disagreements with Kant&rsquo;s position about logic, and he never altered his view that Kant&rsquo;s view of logic was superficial: &ldquo;&hellip; he [i.e. Kant] never touches this last doctrine [i.e. logic] without betraying marks of hasty, superficial study&rdquo; ( Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce , Volume 2, Section 3; hereafter such Collected Papers references will be cited as as CP , 2.3). Even worse, Peirce held, was the Logik of Hegel: Kant&rsquo;s fault &ldquo;&hellip; is a hundredfold more true of Hegel&rsquo;s Logik &hellip;&thinsp;. That work cannot justly be regarded as anything more than a sketch&rdquo; ( CP , 2.32). Nevertheless, Peirce continued to respect and read the first Critique throughout his life. For a fuller discussion of Peirce&rsquo;s own views about how his work related to that of Kant, Hegel, and Schelling, see the supplementary document: Peirce&rsquo;s View of the Relationship Between His Own Work and German Idealism 2. Difficulty of Access to Peirce&rsquo;s Writings Peirce&rsquo;s extensive publications are scattered among various publication media, and have been difficult to collect. Shortly after his death in 1914, his widow Juliette sold his unpublished manuscripts to the Department of Philosophy at Harvard University. Initially they were under the care of Josiah Royce, but after Royce&rsquo;s death in 1916, and especially after the end of the First World War, the papers were poorly cared for. Many of them were misplaced, lost, given away, scrambled, and the like. Carolyn Eisele, one of several genuine heroes in the great effort to locate and assemble Peirce&rsquo;s writings, discovered a lost trunk full of Peirce&rsquo;s papers and manuscripts only in the mid-1950s; the trunk had been secreted, apparently for decades, in an unlit, obscure part of the basement in Harvard&rsquo;s Widener Library. In the 1930s volumes of The Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce began to appear, with Charles Hartshorne, Paul Weiss, and Arthur Burks as their editors. For almost three decades these volumes, and various collections of entries culled from them were the only generally available source for Peirce&rsquo;s thoughts. Unfortunately, many of the entries in the Collected Papers are not integral pieces of Peirce&rsquo;s own design, but rather stretches of writing that were cobbled together by the editors at their own discretion (sometimes one might almost say &ldquo;whim&rdquo;) from different Peircean sources. Often a single entry will consist of patches of writing from very different periods of Peirce&rsquo;s intellectual life, and these patches might even be in tension or outright contradiction with each other. Such entries in the Collected Papers make very difficult reading if one tries to regard them as consistent, sustained passages of argument. They also tend to give the reader a false picture of Peirce as unsystematic, desultory, and unable to complete a train of thought. In general, even though Peirce is often obscure and even at his best is seldom easy to read, the Collected Papers make Peirce&rsquo;s thinking look much more obscure than it really is. The only sensible and intelligent way to publish the works of someone like Peirce, who wrote voluminously and over such a long period of time (57 years), is to arrange the publication chronologically and to employ extremely careful editing. In such a fashion, the entire set of Peircean works can be presented, as Peirce conceived them and in their natural temporal setting and order. Finally, beginning in 1976 with the organizational conception of Max H. Fisch and the help of Edward Moore, the Peirce Edition Project (PEP) was created at Indiana University-Purdue University at Indianapolis (UIPUI). Then, under the PEP, in the 1980s, there began to appear a meticulously edited chronological edition of carefully selected works of Peirce: this is the Writings of Charles S. Peirce: a Chronological Edition , edited by The Peirce Edition Project of the Indiana University-Purdue University at Indianapolis. Although the Chronological Edition has been fettered from time to time by lack of proper funding, the Chronological Edition has succeeded in covering extremely well in its first seven published volumes the major writings from 1857 to 1892. (At the present time, October 2014, Volume 7 is still awaiting publication, even though Volume 8, covering writings from 1890 to 1892 already has been published. Volume 7 is to be an edition of Peirce&rsquo;s definitions for the Century Dictionary . It is to be edited by the Peirce Edition Project in conjunction with the University of Quebec at Montreal (UQAM)), under the supervision of Professor Francois Latraverse.) The impressive achievement of the PEP is finally making it possible to assess the real Peirce, instead of the chopped-up and then re-pasted-together picture of Peirce previously available. In particular the Chronological Edition has made it possible to see the development of Peirce&rsquo;s thinking from its earliest stages to its later developments. Questions long vexed in Peirce scholarship are finally beginning to be debated usefully by Peirce scholars: whether there is genuine systematic unity in Peirce&rsquo;s thought, whether his ideas changed or remained the same over time, in what particulars his thought did change and why, when exactly certain notions were first conceived by Peirce, whether there were definite &ldquo;periods&rdquo; in Peirce&rsquo;s intellectual development, and what exactly Peirce meant by some of his more obscure notions such as his universal categories (on which see below). Continued funding for the Peirce Edition Project is obviously a crucial priority in the ongoing effort to bring to public light the thoughts of this extremely important American philosopher. In addition to the Chronological Edition of the Peirce Edition Project, other venues for editing and publishing Peirce&rsquo;s work are regularly found, and there are several excellent editions of particular lectures, lecture-series, chains of correspondence, and the like. Just four such editions will be mentioned here. First, there is the edition of Peirce&rsquo;s Cambridge Conferences Lectures of 1898, edited by Kenneth Laine Ketner and with an introduction on the consequences of mathematics by Kenneth Laine Ketner and Hilary Putnam and comments on the lectures by Hilary Putnam, entitled Reasoning and the Logic of Things . Second, there is the edition of Peirce&rsquo;s Harvard Lectures on Pragmatism of 1903, edited by Patricia Ann Turrisi, entitled Pragmatism as a Principle and Method of Right Thinking . Third, there is the four-volume edition of Peirce&rsquo;s mathematical writings edited by Carolyn Eisele, entitled The New Elements of Mathematics by Charles S. Peirce . Fourth, there is the two-part edition of Peirce&rsquo;s writings on the history and logic of science edited by Carolyn Eisele, entitled Historical Perspectives on Peirce&rsquo;s Logic of Science: A History of Science . 3. Deduction, Induction, and Abduction Prior to about 1865, thinkers on logic commonly had divided arguments into two subclasses: the class of deductive arguments (a.k.a. necessary inferences) and the class of inductive arguments (a.k.a. probable inferences). About this time, Peirce began to hold that there were two utterly distinct classes of probable inferences, which he referred to as inductive inferences and abductive inferences (which he also called hypotheses and retroductive inferences). Peirce reached this conclusion by entertaining what would happen if one were to interchange propositions in the syllogism AAA-1 (Barbara): All M s are P s; all S s are M s; therefore, all S s are P s. This valid syllogism Peirce accepted as representative of deduction. But he also seemed typically to regard it in connection with a problem of drawing conclusions on the basis of taking samples. For let us regard being an M as being a member of a population of some sort, say being a ball of the population of balls in some particular urn. Let us regard P as being some property a member of this population can have, say being red. And, finally, let us regard being an S as being a member of a random sample taken from this population. Then our syllogism in Barbara becomes: All balls in this urn are red; all balls in this particular random sample are taken from this urn; therefore, all balls in this particular random sample are red. Peirce regarded the major premise here as being the Rule, the minor premise as being the particular Case, and the conclusion as being the Result of the argument. The argument is a piece of deduction. In this example the argument is also an argument from population to random sample that is also a necessary inference. But now let us see what happens if we form a new argument by interchanging the conclusion (the Result) with the major premise (the Rule). The resultant argument becomes: All S s are P s (Result); all S s are M s (Case); therefore, all M s are P s (Rule). This is the invalid syllogism AAA-3. But let us now construe it as pertaining to drawing conclusions on the basis of taking samples. The argument then becomes: All balls in this particular random sample are red; all balls in this particular random sample are taken from this urn; therefore, all balls in this urn are red. What we have here is an argument from sample to population. This sort of argument is what Peirce understood to be the core meaning of induction. That is to say, for Peirce, induction in the most basic sense is argument from random sample to population. It should be clear that inductive inference is not necessary inference: it might well turn out that the claims stated in the premises are true even though the claim made in the conclusion is false. Let us now go further and see what happens if, from the deduction AAA-1, we form a new argument by interchanging the conclusion (the Result) with the minor premise (the Case). The resultant argument becomes: All M s are P s (Rule); all S s are P s (Result); therefore, all S s are M s (Case). This is the invalid syllogism AAA-2. But let us now regard it as pertaining to drawing conclusions on the basis of taking samples. The argument then becomes: All balls in this urn are red; all balls in this particular random sample are red; therefore, all balls in this particular random sample are taken from this urn. What we have here is nothing at all like an argument from population to sample or an argument from sample to population: rather, it is a form of probable argument entirely different from both deduction and induction. It has the air of conjecture or &ldquo;educated guess&rdquo; about it. This new type of argument Peirce called hypothesis (also, retroduction, and also, abduction). It should be clear that abduction is never necessary inference There is no need to consider the variant of AAA-1 that is obtained by interchanging the Rule and the Case in AAA-1. The resultant argument is of the form AAA-4, which is exactly the same argument as AAA-1 with interchanged premises. So it is simply deduction over again. Peirce&rsquo;s thinking about deduction, induction, and abduction can be seen also from examples he gives of arguments that are similar to the syllogisms he discusses, but retain the universal affirmative judgment only for the Case, using a definite percentage between 0% and 100% for both the Rule and the Result. Corresponding to AAA-1 (deduction) we have the following argument: X % of M s are P s (Rule); all S s are M s (Case); therefore, X % of S s are P s (Result). Construing this argument, as we did before, as applying to drawing balls from urns, the argument becomes: X % of the balls in this urn are red; all the balls in this random sample are taken from this urn; therefore, X % of the balls in this random sample are red. Peirce still regards this argument as being a deduction, even though it is not&mdash;as the argument AAA-1 is&mdash;a necesary inference. He calls such an argument a &ldquo;statistical deduction&rdquo; or a &ldquo;probabilistic deduction proper.&rdquo; Corresponding to AAA-3 (induction) we have the following argument: X % of S s are P s (Result); all S s are M s (Case); therefore, X % of M s are P s (Rule). Construing this argument as applying to drawing balls from urns, the argument becomes: X % of the balls in this random sample are red; all the balls in this random sample are taken from this urn; therefore, X % of the balls in this urn are red. Here we still have an argument whose essence is the logical transition from a random sample to the population from which the sample is taken. The inference is made by virtue of what Hans Reichenbach called &ldquo;the straight rule&rdquo;: the proportion of a trait found in the sample is attributed also to the population. Corresponding to AAA-2 (abduction) we have the following argument: X % of M s are P s (Rule); X % of S s are P s (Result); therefor