--> Diodorus Cronus (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy) Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Menu Browse Table of Contents What's New Random Entry Chronological Archives About Editorial Information About the SEP Editorial Board How to Cite the SEP Special Characters Advanced Tools Contact Support SEP Support the SEP PDFs for SEP Friends Make a Donation SEPIA for Libraries Entry Navigation Entry Contents Bibliography Academic Tools Friends PDF Preview Author and Citation Info Back to Top Diodorus Cronus First published Tue Apr 23, 2024 Diodorus Cronus (died circa 284 BCE) was a figure widely known and admired in antiquity, for his dialectical skills, contributions to the study of logic and his philosophical views. Recent philosophy and scholarship have engaged with his Master Argument and his modal system, but other aspects of his thought, including a version of atomism, arguments against change, ambiguity, singular reference and past-tense statements, have been relatively neglected. Debates over his affiliation have played an important role in the historiography of post-classical Greek philosophy, in particular whether there was a Dialectical school, of which Diodorus would be a principal representative. 1. Biography 2. Metaphysics 2.1 The Master Argument 2.2 Antecedents of the Master 2.3 Fate and the Diodorean Modal System 3. Logic 3.1 Conditionals 4. Ontology 4.1 Simples and &lsquo;atomism&rsquo; 4.2 Motivation for atomism 5. Physics 5.1 Arguments against present change 5.2 Truths about past change 6. Philosophy of Language 6.1 Ambiguity, Meaning and Paradox 6.2 Diodorus on naming 6.3 Paradoxes 7. Conclusion Bibliography Collections of Primary Sources Secondary Sources Academic Tools Other Internet Resources Related Entries 1. Biography Diodorus was born in Iasos, a city in ancient Caria, on the west coast of modern-day Turkey. Iasos had been part of the Delian league during the Peloponnesian war (431&ndash;404BCE) and Diodorus studied dialectic with a minor teacher Apollonius Cronus, a native of Cyrene. Diodorus inherited the nickname, &lsquo;Cronus&rsquo;, from Apollonius. &lsquo;Cronus&rsquo; seems to have meant &lsquo;old codger&rsquo; (Plato Euthydemus 287b), although it may also have implied &lsquo;cunning&rsquo; (D&ouml;ring 1972, 124; Muller 1985, 128; Iliad II 205; Odyssey XXI, 415; Hesiod Theogony 18). Apollonius had studied with Eubulides of Miletus, a student of Euclides of Megara. Euclides was a long-standing member of the Socratic circle ( Phaedo 59b-c; Theaetetus 142a-143b). Diodorus&rsquo; date of death is easier to establish than his date of birth. David Sedley has shown that Diodorus died in Alexandria around 284BCE (Sedley 1977, 80), a date now generally accepted (Sorabji 1980, 106; Algra 1999, 52; Duncombe 2023). Diodorus was teaching in Athens in the 310s BCE, where we know he taught Zeno of Citum, founder of Stoicism, and Philo the Logician, Diodorus&rsquo; colleague in the Dialectical school. The sceptic Arcesilaus arrived in Athens around 295BCE and was at least influenced by Diodorus, if not directly taught by him. When Ptolemy Soter (d. 282&ndash;3) began to draw Greek intellectuals to Alexandria, it seems Diodorus joined them. In Alexandria, Diodorus was sufficiently well known that Callimachus could feature him in epigrams. Callimachus himself did not arrive in Alexandria until 290&ndash;85. We know from Diogenes Laertius (DL, 2, 111&ndash;2) that Diodorus died during the reign of Ptolemy Soter, so before 283&ndash;2. If Diodorus died in Alexandria, it cannot have been before 290 and was probably after 285, but before 283&ndash;2, making 284 a reasonable conjecture. Aside from the historical interest, dating Diodorus death to the mid-280s makes it extremely unlikely that Aristotle (c.384-322) was influenced by Diodorus. Even if Diodorus had an exceptionally long career of 50 years, starting, say in 334BCE, his active period barely overlaps with Aristotle&rsquo;s lifetime. Diodorus did use technical language we find in Aristotle&rsquo;s writings and some of his arguments follow Aristotle&rsquo;s closely, so it seems possible that Didodorus had access to Aristotle&rsquo;s texts, presumably while they were still in circulation before the death of Theophrastus (Falcon 2014). But given that Diodorus must have been relatively young, it seems that an influence would have been from Aristotle to Diodorus. Diodorus was traditionally thought to be part of the Megaric school, founded by Euclides of Megara. However, the scholarly consensus is now that Diodorus was part of a separate Dialectical School. Diodorus is described in our most reliable sources as a &lsquo;dialectician&rsquo; (or &lsquo;Dialectician&rsquo;), and it is only very late that we have evidence that he was called a &lsquo;Megaric&rsquo; (Denyer 2002), although it is possible that Chrysippus termed certain paradoxes developed by Diodorus &lsquo;Megaric questions&rsquo; (D&ouml;ring 1989, 297; Ebert 2008, 279; Allen 2018, 36&ndash;37). For detailed discussion of this issue, see the entry on the Dialectical School. 2. Metaphysics 2.1 The Master Argument The main testimony for the Master Argument comes from Epictetus and he tells us the following: The Master Argument seems to have been put from these sorts of premises. For these three conflict with each other: Every past truth is necessary; the impossible does not follow from the possible; there is a possible truth which neither is true nor will be. When he saw this conflict, Diodorus used the persuasiveness of the first two premises to establish that nothing is possible that neither is true nor will be (Epictetus Discourses , 2, 19, 1.1&ndash;2.1 = D&ouml;ring 131). Epictetus&rsquo; report gives us the following information: (MA1) Every past truth is necessary; (MA2) The impossible does not follow from the possible; (MA3) There is a possible truth which neither is true nor will be. But (MA1) to (MA3) are reported to form an inconsistent triad; so we must deny one of them. Diodorus denied (MA3). That is, he affirmed: (D) All possible truths are either true or will be true (cf. Boethius, Commentary on the De Interpretatione of Aristotle , 234.22&ndash;26 = D&ouml;ring 138). The Master Argument is sometimes thought to be an argument for fatalism (see the relevant section of the entry on fatalism , the discussion of the Master Argument in the entry on the Dialectical School and the entry on Arthur Prior ). Sometimes it is thought to be an argument for Diodorus&rsquo; account of possibility. Sometimes (including by Epictetus at Discourses , 2.18,17) it is thought to be a paradox or sophism to be solved. These are not exclusive options. Taken as a sophism we can see the argument as a trilemma, or a demonstration that the three premises are inconsistent and so one must be rejected. Diodorus could then be seen to reject the third, to yield his account of possibility. Diodorus account of possibility was taken in antiquity to yield a form of fatalism, since only what is now or will be true is possible (Alexander In An. Pr. 183.34 &ndash; 184.10). That is, anything not true now or in the future is impossible. I&rsquo;m not a lawyer and never will be; so, according to Diodorus definition of possibility, it is not merely false, but also impossible that I be a lawyer. We do not know precisely how Diodorus formulated the argument. It seems likely that, in the centuries separating Diodorus&rsquo; formulation from Epictetus report, some degree of regimentation had already taken place (Marion and Rukert, 2016, 211n55). Epictetus formulates the argument as a trilemma to exhibit the logical space of options, and to contrast the approaches of the Dialectician Panthoides (who rejected MA1), the Stoic logician Chrysippus (who rejected MA2) and Diodorus himself (who rejected MA3). The trilemma had become a common technique for presenting a philosophical issue (Seel, 1993, 295), but it is unlikely that the originator of the argument presented it this way, since we know that Diodorus used MA1 and MA2 as premises to argue for D, not merely to show that MA3 is incompatible with MA1 and MA2 and invite us to reject one. Epictetus also presents the premises in assertoric, rather than interrogative, form and Diodorus would likely have presented the argument dialectically, although it does not come down to us in that form. Although the contemporary literature on the Master Argument involves machinery from modal and temporal logic, in ancient times the argument was well-known outside philosophical circles, and was discussed in informal, social contexts (Epictetus, Discourses 2.19.8), suggesting that it could be stated informally. None of the ancient logicians who knew how the Master Argument was formulated thought that it was invalid, since the approach seems to have been to reject one or more premises. So, it must have been plausibly valid to thinkers with a range of logical views. Here is one tentative, non-technical way to think about the moves in the argument, which may resemble Diodorus&rsquo; presentation. I did not train in gymnastics in childhood; so I am not now an Olympic gymnast. Neither will I be in the future. It is now too late for me to be an Olympic gymnast! But is it possible that I am or will be an Olympic gymnast? Suppose that it is possible that I will be an Olympic gymnast. That implies that I did train in gymnastics from childhood. But, since I did not train in gymnastics from childhood, it is by now impossible that I trained in gymnastics. So if it is possible that I will be an Olympic gymnast, an impossibility would follow from that possibility. But the impossible does not follow the possible. So, it is not possible that I will be an Olympic gymnast. A similar line of thought would block the present possibility of me being an Olympic gymnast. Suppose it is possible that I am now an Olympic gymnast. That implies that I did train in gymnastics from childhood. But, since I did not train in gymnastics from childhood, it is by now impossible that I trained in gymnastics. So if it is possible that I am an Olympic gymnast, an impossibility would follow. But the impossible does not follow the possible. So, it is not possible that I am an Olympic gymnast. Hence, unless I either am, or will be, and Olympic gymnast, it is not possible for me to be an Olympic gymnast. 2.2 Antecedents of the Master We find a possible antecedent to the Master Argument in Aristotle&rsquo;s Metaphysics 9.3. There are two relevant parts of that passage. The first is an account of potentialities which Aristotle attributes to &lsquo;the Megarics&rsquo; and others: There are some who say, for example, the Megarics, that something is possible only when it is actual and that thing is not possible when it is not actual. For example, someone who is not building cannot build, but someone who is building can when building. Similarly in the other cases. ( Metaphysics 9.3, 1046b29&ndash;32) Although the precise view, and the identity of those who hold the view, is disputed, the target view seems to be that that something has a power or capacity only when that capacity is manifest. Roughly: (M0) \(\alpha\) can \(\phi\) only when \(\alpha\) is \(\phi\)-ing. For example, a builder can build only when in fact building. M0 resembles D for M0 looks like another way to reject MA3. According to MA3, it is possible that a builder builds, while in fact the builder is not building and never will. But according to M0, while the builder is not building, the builder cannot build. If what the builder cannot do is not possible for the builder, then it is not possible that the builder builds, while not, in fact, building. You might think that M0 and D are both motivated by a suspicion of mere possibilities, that is, possibilities that exist but remain unactualized. On the other hand, D differs from M0 in three important ways. First, M0 is formulated in terms of the powers that individuals have to act: a builder can build only when building. D is formulated in terms of whole propositions being true or possible. Second, M0 is a one way conditional, while D makes an equivalence claim between a possible truth and what is or will be true, so would be a biconditional. Third, and most importantly, D involves a disjunction: anything possible either is true or will be; M0 makes no such distinction between present and future truths. How can these differences be explained? There are two (compatible) explanations for the first difference. First, it might simply be appealing to think, like Aristotle, that modal truths, such as, &lsquo;it is possible that the builder build&rsquo; are grounded in facts about individuals and their powers, such as the builder and his power to build. If that is the case, then the move to a propositional formulation would be relatively harmless, and amenable to both those who think there are existing, but unactualised, possibilities, and those who don&rsquo;t. The second is that Diodorus himself was one of the originators of propositional logic (see the entry on the Dialectical School ). Thus, it would be natural for him to formulate the point using modal operators on propositions, rather than in terms of individuals and their powers. The formulation would look like this: (D1) It is possible that \(p\) only if it is true that \(p\). There is no reason to think that this was an actual interim stage in the development, but it is useful to consider for heuristic purposes. Once we consider D1, the second difference between M0 and D can also be explained simply too. It is natural to think that: (T) If it is true that \(p\), then it is possible that \(p\). In fact, this is just to accept the T axiom of modal logic, which many modal logics accept. These two taken together would allow a biconditional formulation like this: (D2) It is possible that \(p\) if and only if it is true that \(p\). The third difference is a little more philosophically interesting. Aristotle presents a series of arguments against M0. One of the most powerful is that M0 seems to rule out change ( Metaphysics 9.3, 1047a10&ndash;15). Aristotle&rsquo;s basic line of thought is that, according to M0, \(a\) can sit only when sitting. So, when \(a\) is sitting can \(a\) stand? Apparently not: if \(a\) is sitting, \(a\) is not standing. But if \(a\) is not standing, \(a\) lacks the power to stand (from M0). If \(a\) lacks the power to stand, \(a\) cannot stand. If \(a\) cannot stand, \(a\) will not stand in the future. So, if \(a\) is sitting, \(a\) does not stand in the future. Since &lsquo;sitting&rsquo; and &lsquo;standing&rsquo; are just arbitrary properties, the argument generalises to all change. Aristotle would need some suppressed premise to connect the idea that something cannot stand to the idea that it never will stand. Such a principle might be found in De Caelo 1, 11&ndash;12 (Makin and Denyer 2000). This sort of argument could be blocked by accepting the disjunctive account that what is possible is true or will be. For in that case, even if a lacks the power to stand now, it does not follow that a cannot stand in the future. That is, suppose a is sitting. With the disjunctive account, at present, if a is not standing, a may still be able to stand, as long as a turns out to be standing in the future. Thus, the Diodorean account of possibility could be a development of the Megaric position on powers. But even if D is historically connected to the Megaric position in Metaphysics 9.3, it does not follow that Diodorus was affiliated to a Megaric &lsquo;school&rsquo;, especially because the Master Argument seems to defend D on independent grounds. That suffices for MA3, the negation of which is supposed to be the conclusion of the Master Argument. What about the premises that lead us to that conclusion? MA2 tells us that entailment cannot take us from possibilities to impossibilities: possibility is closed under entailment. Some readers, such as (Mates 1953, 39) and (Denyer 1981b), have thought that we should understand MA2 in terms of Diodorus&rsquo; own account of &lsquo;following&rsquo;, which we know from other sources (SE M 8, 112&ndash;117 = D&ouml;ring 142): a conditional is true iff it is not possible that the antecedent is true and the consequent false. It is unclear whether Diodorus intended his own notion of &lsquo;possible&rsquo; here. But since the Master Argument seems to have been intended to argue for Diodorean possibilities, he could not invoke his own notion without begging the question. Probably the best way to understand this premise also appeals to Metaphysics 9.3. After Aristotle has rebutted the Megaric position, Aristotle introduces a &lsquo;test&rsquo; for whether something is possible: What is possible is that for which, if the actuality of what is said to have the possibility obtains, then nothing impossible will result. ( Metaphysics 9.3, 1047a24&ndash;6) This test works like this. To test whether \(p\) is possible, suppose p is actual. If nothing impossible follows this supposition, \(p\) is possible. I am sitting and we want to test whether it is possible that I stand. So, suppose I stand. If nothing impossible results from this supposition, it is possible that I stand. The problem is, stated as baldly as this, the test is underdetermined. I can apply the test making no accommodations: I am sitting in a room where no one is standing. And we want to test whether it is possible that I stand. So, suppose I stand. In that case, I am standing but also no one in this room is standing. This is a contradiction and so an impossibility. So it turns out that, according to the test, I cannot stand. It seems unreasonable to apply the test with no accommodation whatsoever, but also unreasonable to allow all accommodations by changing the truth-value of any proposition. If I&rsquo;m maximally accommodating, only self-contradictory propositions turn out impossible. So we can hold some propositions as a fixed background for testing some p , for example, the necessary truths. The advantage of understanding MA2 in light of this test is that it gives a clear way to operationalize MA2 &ndash; using this idea of supposition- and also it is a conception of possibility shared by people like Aristotle who hold that some possibilities are not and never will be realized (although cf. Makin and Denyer 2000). Finally, what about MA1? MA1 seems obvious: the past is fixed, what&rsquo;s done is done and cannot be undone, and something like this was accepted by Aristotle, who quotes Agathon: &lsquo;For even from god this power is kept, this power alone/To make it true that what&rsquo;s been done had never been&rsquo; ( Nicomachean Ethics 1139b10, Trans. Broadie and Rowe). But MA1 is not just saying that the past is irrevocable; it is saying that it is necessary. There are things which are irrevocable which are, for all that, not necessary. For example, it is not within my power to change what happens is a distant galaxy: from my standpoint, what happens far away is unalterable. But what happens in a distant galaxy is not always necessary: there are irrevocable, but contingent, truths. Even with this caveat, MA1 needs careful formulation. Martha Kneale (Kneale 1937) introduced three classes of counterexample to MA1 into this literature, but her contribution is sometimes overlooked. These counterexamples are cases where a past truth seems to become false. But a past truth that can become false is not a necessary truth. The first class of counter examples are past negative existentials. (i) &lsquo;There has never been a female Labour UK Prime Minister&rsquo;. This is a past truth, but it could become false, if the UK elects a female Labour Prime Minister. The second class are past temporal distance. (ii) &lsquo;Socrates died 2422 years ago&rsquo; is a past truth in 2023, but will be a past falsehood from 2024 onwards. Kneale&rsquo;s third class are past definite descriptions, such as (iii) &lsquo;The UK Prime Minister who completed a PhD was Scottish&rsquo;. Should the UK elect another holder of a doctorate, this would become false. The solution may be to notice &ndash; with (Denyer 2009, 38&ndash;39) who follows (Prior 1967) &ndash; that not every sentence that involves a past tense is a past-tense sentence. All three of Kneale&rsquo;s cases are not past truths in the sense that the main operator of the sentence is a past-tense operator, but rather the main connective is either a negation or an existential quantifier. For example &lsquo;There has never been a female Labour UK Prime Minister&rsquo; can be written as &lsquo;It is not the case that there has been a female Labour UK Prime Minister&rsquo;. This is formalised as &lsquo;\(\neg \langle P\rangle p\)&rsquo; where &lsquo;\(p\)&rsquo; is the present-tense sentence &lsquo;there is a female Labour UK Prime Minister&rsquo; and &lsquo;\(\langle P\rangle\)&rsquo; is the past-tense operator &lsquo;it has been the case that&hellip;&rsquo;. If (i) changes its truth value when a female Labour Prime Minister is elected, that is only because (i) is a present-tense negated sentence. With all that, however, taking an historical perspective on the Master Argument, as well as the more common logical perspective, shows why the Master Argument might be appealing. It develops a conclusion that is radically anti-Aristotelian, that what is possible is or will be the case, a modal collapse, from premises that an Aristotelian would accept, and indeed, that Aristotle appears to have accepted. Not only that, but it seems that Diodorus&rsquo; notion of modality differs in an explicable way from the Megarics of Metaphysics 9.3, perhaps in response to Aristotle&rsquo;s criticism, while retaining the spirit of their view. 2.3 Fate and the Diodorean Modal System The Master Argument is supposed to be, amongst other things, an argument for &lsquo;fatalism&rsquo; or &lsquo;logical determinism&rsquo;, because it argues for Diodorus&rsquo; notion of possibility, which leaves no room for counterfactual possibilities and hence rules out freedom. Several sources report Diodorus&rsquo; account of possibility (Boethius On Aristotle&rsquo;s On Interpretation 234.22&ndash;6; Alexander On Aristotle&rsquo;s Prior Analytics 183&ndash;4; Simplicius On Aristotle&rsquo;s Categories 196, 220&ndash;25). According to these sources, Diodorus&rsquo; view is that: it is possible that \(p\) just in case either \(p\) is the true or will be true. Here is Alexander&rsquo;s report: According to him it is possible for me to be at Corinth if I am at Corinth or if, otherwise, I am going to be at Corinth. But if I were never in Corinth, it would not be possible. And a child&rsquo;s becoming a grammarian is possible if he ever becomes one. (Alexander On Aristotle&rsquo;s Prior Analytics , 183&ndash;4) This case fits well with the other reports. It is possible that Alexander is in Corinth if either he is in Corinth or is going to be in Corinth. It is possible that a child becomes a grammarian if he does in fact become one. In general, where &lsquo;\(p\)&rsquo; is a present tensed content, and &lsquo;\(\langle F\rangle \ldots\)&rsquo; is a one-place modal operator meaning &lsquo;it will be the case at some future time that&hellip;&rsquo;, then: Diodorean Possibility . It is possible that \(p\) iff \(p\) or \(\langle F\rangle p\) Diodorean possibility ignores any intrinsic features of Alexander or the child, for example, whether the child has the capacity to learn grammar. All that Diodorean possibility cares about is what in fact turns out to be the case. What is more, if evaluating whether \(p\) is possible, we only take account of what is true now and in the future. So if we know the truth values of a proposition at all times (or even just all future times), we know whether it is Diodorean possible. This contrasts with our usual modal notion of possibility. Suppose that \(p\) is always false. Is it poss