--> Ancient Logic (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy) Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Menu Browse Table of Contents What's New Random Entry Chronological Archives About Editorial Information About the SEP Editorial Board How to Cite the SEP Special Characters Advanced Tools Contact Support SEP Support the SEP PDFs for SEP Friends Make a Donation SEPIA for Libraries Entry Navigation Entry Contents Bibliography Academic Tools Friends PDF Preview Author and Citation Info Back to Top Ancient Logic First published Wed Dec 13, 2006; substantive revision Wed Apr 15, 2020 Logic as a discipline starts with the transition from the more or less unreflective use of logical methods and argument patterns to the reflection on and inquiry into these methods and patterns and their elements, including the syntax and semantics of sentences. In Greek and Roman antiquity, discussions of some elements of logic and a focus on methods of inference can be traced back to the late 5 th century BCE. The Sophists, and later Plato (early 4 th c.) displayed an interest in sentence analysis, truth, and fallacies, and Eubulides of Miletus (mid-4 th c.) is on record as the inventor of both the Liar and the Sorites paradox. But logic as a fully systematic discipline begins with Aristotle, who systematized much of the logical inquiry of his predecessors. His main achievements were his theory of the logical interrelation of affirmative and negative existential and universal statements and, based on this theory, his syllogistic, which can be interpreted as a system of deductive inference. Aristotle&rsquo;s logic is known as term-logic, since it is concerned with the logical relations between terms, such as &lsquo;human being&rsquo;, &lsquo;animal&rsquo;, &lsquo;white&rsquo;. It shares elements with both set theory and predicate logic. Aristotle&rsquo;s successors in his school, the Peripatos, notably Theophrastus and Eudemus, widened the scope of deductive inference and improved some aspects of Aristotle&rsquo;s logic. In the Hellenistic period, and apparently independent of Aristotle&rsquo;s achievements, the logician Diodorus Cronus and his pupil Philo (see the entry Dialectical school ) worked out the beginnings of a logic that took propositions, rather than terms, as its basic elements. They influenced the second major theorist of logic in antiquity, the Stoic Chrysippus (mid-3 rd c.), whose main achievement is the development of a propositional logic, crowned by a deductive system. Regarded by many in antiquity as the greatest logician, he was innovative in a large number of topics that are central to contemporary formal and philosophical logic. The many close similarities between Chrysippus&rsquo; philosophical logic and that of Gottlob Frege are especially striking. Chrysippus&rsquo; Stoic successors systematized his logic, and made some additions. The development of logic from c. 100 BCE to c. 250 CE remains mostly in the dark, but there can be no doubt that logic was one of the topics regularly studied and researched. At some point Peripatetics and Stoics began taking notice of each other&rsquo;s logical systems, and we witness some conflation of both terminologies and theories. Aristotelian syllogistic became known as &lsquo;categorical syllogistic&rsquo; and the Peripatetic adaptation of Stoic syllogistic as &lsquo;hypothetical syllogistic&rsquo;. In the 2 nd century CE, Galen attempted to synthesize the two traditions; he also professed to have introduced a third kind of syllogism, the &lsquo;relational syllogism&rsquo;, which apparently was meant to help formalize mathematical reasoning. The attempt of some Middle Platonists (1 st c. BCE&ndash;2 nd c. CE) to claim a specifically Platonic logic failed, and in its stead, the Neo-Platonists (3 rd &ndash;6 th c. CE) adopted a scholasticized version of Aristotelian logic as their own. In the monumental&mdash;if rarely creative&mdash;volumes of the Greek commentators on Aristotle&rsquo;s logical works we find elements of Stoic and later Peripatetic logic as well as Platonism, and ancient mathematics and rhetoric. Much the same holds for the Latin logical writings by Apuleius (2 nd c. CE) and Boethius (6 th c. CE), which pave the way for Aristotelian logic, thus supplemented, to enter the Medieval era. 1. Pre-Aristotelian Logic 1.1 Syntax and Semantics 1.2 Argument Patterns and Valid Inference 2. Aristotle 2.1 Dialectics 2.2 Sub-sentential Classifications 2.3 Syntax and Semantics of Sentences 2.4 Non-modal Syllogistic 2.5 Modal Logic 3. The early Peripatetics: Theophrastus and Eudemus 3.1 Improvements and Modifications of Aristotle&rsquo;s Logic 3.2 Prosleptic Syllogisms 3.3 Forerunners of Modus Ponens and Modus Tollens 3.4 Wholly Hypothetical Syllogisms 4. Diodorus Cronus and Philo the Logician 5. The Stoics 5.1 Logical Achievements Besides Propositional Logic 5.2 Syntax and Semantics of Complex Propositions 5.3 Arguments 5.4 Stoic Syllogistic 5.5 Logical Paradoxes 6. Epicurus and the Epicureans 7. Later Antiquity Bibliography Greek and Latin Texts Translations of Greek and Latin Texts Secondary Literature Academic Tools Other Internet Resources Related Entries 1. Pre-Aristotelian Logic 1.1 Syntax and Semantics Some of the Sophists classified types of sentences ( logoi ) according to their force. So Protagoras (485&ndash;415 BCE), who included wish, question, answer and command (Diels Kranz (DK) 80.A1, Diogenes Laertius (D. L.) 9.53&ndash;4), and Alcidamas (pupil of Gorgias, fl. 4 th BCE), who distinguished assertion ( phasis ), denial ( apophasis ), question and address ( prosagoreusis ) (D. L. 9.54). Antisthenes (mid-5 th &ndash;mid-4 th cent.) defined a sentence as &lsquo;that which indicates what a thing was or is&rsquo; (D. L. 6.3, DK 45) and stated that someone who says what is speaks truly (DK49). Perhaps the earliest surviving passage on logic is found in the Dissoi Logoi or Double Arguments (DK 90.4, c. 400 BCE). It is evidence for a debate over truth and falsehood. Opposed were the views (i) that truth is a&mdash;temporal&mdash;property of sentences, and that a sentence is true (when it is said), if and only if things are as the sentence says they are when it is said, and false if they aren&rsquo;t; and (ii) that truth is an atemporal property of what is said, and that what is said is true if and only if the things are the case, false if they aren&rsquo;t the case. These are rudimentary formulations of two alternative correspondence theories of truth. The same passage displays awareness of the fact that self-referential use of the truth-predicate can be problematic&mdash;an insight also documented by the discovery of the Liar paradox by Eubulides of Miletus (mid-4 th c. BCE) shortly thereafter. Some Platonic dialogues contain passages whose topic is indubitably logic. In the Sophist , Plato analyzes simple statements as containing a verb ( rh&ecirc;ma ), which indicates action, and a noun( onoma ), which indicates the agent ( Soph . 261e&ndash;262a). Anticipating the modern distinction of logical types, he argues that neither a series of nouns nor a series of verbs can combine into a statement ( Soph . 262a&ndash;d). Plato also divorces syntax (&lsquo;what is a statement?&rsquo;) from semantics (&lsquo;when is it true?&rsquo;). Something (e.g. &lsquo;Theaetetus is sitting&rsquo;) is a statement if it both succeeds in specifying a subject and says something about this subject. Plato thus determines subject and predicate as relational elements in a statement and excludes as statements subject-predicate combinations containing empty subject expressions. Something is a true statement if with reference to its subject (Theaetetus) it says of what is (e.g. sitting) that it is. Something is a false statement if with reference to its subject it says of something other than what is (e.g. flying), that it is. Here Plato produces a sketch of a deflationist theory of truth ( Soph . 262e&ndash;263d; cf. Crat. 385b). He also distinguished negations from affirmations and took the negation particle to have narrow scope: it negates the predicate, not the whole sentence ( Soph. 257b&ndash;c). There are many passages in Plato where he struggles to explain certain logical relations: for example his theory that things participate in Forms corresponds to a rudimentary theory of predication; in the Sophist and elsewhere he grapples with the class relations of exclusion, union and co-extension; also with the difference between the &lsquo;is&rsquo; of predication (being) and the &lsquo;is&rsquo; of identity (sameness); and in Republic 4, 436bff., he anticipates the law of non-contradiction. But his explications of these logical questions are cast in metaphysical terms, and so can at most be regarded as proto-logical. 1.2 Argument Patterns and Valid Inference Pre-Aristotelian evidence for reflection on argument forms and valid inference are harder to come by. Both Zeno of Elea (born c. 490 BCE) and Socrates (470&ndash;399) were famous for the ways in which they refuted an opponent&rsquo;s view. Their methods display similarities with reductio ad absurdum , but neither of them seems to have theorized about their logical procedures. Zeno produced arguments ( logoi ) that manifest variations of the pattern &lsquo;this (i.e. the opponent&rsquo;s view) only if that. But that is impossible. So this is impossible&rsquo;. Socratic refutation was an exchange of questions and answers in which the opponents would be led, on the basis of their answers, to a conclusion incompatible with their original claim. Plato institutionalized such disputations into structured, rule-governed verbal contests that became known as dialectical argument. The development of a basic logical vocabulary for such contests indicates some reflection upon the patterns of argumentation. The 5 th and early to mid-4 th centuries BCE also see great interest in fallacies and logical paradoxes. Besides the Liar, Eubulides is said to have been the originator of several other logical paradoxes, including the Sorites. Plato&rsquo;s Euthydemus contains a large collection of contemporary fallacies. In attempts to solve such logical puzzles, a logical terminology develops here, too, and the focus on the difference between valid and invalid arguments sets the scene for the search for a criterion of valid inference. Finally, it is possible that the shaping of deduction and proof in Greek mathematics that begins in the later 5 th century BCE served as an inspiration for Aristotle&rsquo;s syllogistic. 2. Aristotle (For a more detailed account see the entry on Aristotle&rsquo;s Logic in this encyclopedia.) Aristotle is the first great logician in the history of logic. His logic was taught by and large without rival from the 4 th to the 19 th centuries CE. Aristotle&rsquo;s logical works were collected and put in a systematic order by later Peripatetics, who entitled them the Organon or &lsquo;tool&rsquo;, because they considered logic not a part but rather an instrument of philosophy. The Organon contains, in traditional order, the Categories , De Interpretatione , Prior Analytics , Posterior Analytics , Topics and Sophistical Refutations . In addition, Metaphysics &Gamma; is a logical treatise that discusses the principle of non-contradiction, and some further logical insights are found scattered throughout Aristotle&rsquo;s other works, such as the Poetics , Rhetoric , De Anima , Metaphysics &Delta; and &Theta;, and some of the biological works. Some parts of the Categories and Posterior Analytics would today be regarded as metaphysics, epistemology or philosophy of science rather than logic. The traditional arrangement of works in the Organon is neither chronological nor Aristotle&rsquo;s own. The original chronology cannot be fully recovered since Aristotle seems often to have inserted supplements into earlier writings at a later time. However, by using logical advances as a criterion, we can conjecture that most of the Topics , Sophistical Refutations , Categories and Metaphysics &Gamma; predate the De Interpretatione , which in turn predates the Prior Analytics and parts of the Posterior Analytics . 2.1 Dialectics The Topics provide a manual for participants in the contests of dialectical argument as instituted in the Academy by Plato. Books 2&ndash;7 provide general procedures or rules ( topoi ) about how to find an argument to establish or refute a given thesis. The descriptions of these procedures&mdash;some of which are so general that they resemble logical laws&mdash;clearly presuppose a notion of logical form, and Aristotle&rsquo;s Topics may thus count as the earliest surviving logical treatise. The Sophistical Refutations are the first systematic classification of fallacies, sorted by what logical flaw each type manifests (e.g. equivocation, begging the question, affirming the consequent, secundum quid ) and how to expose them. 2.2 Sub-sentential Classifications Aristotle distinguishes things that have sentential unity through a combination of expressions (&lsquo;a horse runs&rsquo;) from those that do not (&lsquo;horse&rsquo;, &lsquo;runs&rsquo;); the latter are dealt with in the Categories (the title really means &lsquo;predications&rsquo; [ 1 ] ). They have no truth-value and signify one of the following: substance ( ousia ), quantity ( poson ), quality ( poion ), relation ( pros ti ), location ( pou ), time ( pote ), position ( keisthai ), possession ( echein ), doing ( poiein ) and undergoing ( paschein ). It is unclear whether Aristotle considers this classification to be one of linguistic expressions that can be predicated of something else; or of kinds of predication; or of highest genera. In Topics 1 Aristotle distinguishes four relationships a predicate may have to the subject: it may give its definition, genus, unique property, or accidental property. These are known as predicables. 2.3 Syntax and Semantics of Sentences When writing the De Interpretatione , Aristotle had worked out the following theory of simple sentences: a (declarative) sentence ( apophantikos logos ) or declaration ( apophansis ) is delimited from other pieces of discourse like prayer, command and question by its having a truth-value. The truth-bearers that feature in Aristotle&rsquo;s logic are thus linguistic items. They are spoken sentences that directly signify thoughts (shared by all humans) and through these, indirectly, things. Written sentences in turn signify spoken ones. (Simple) sentences are constructed from two signifying expressions which stand in subject-predicate relation to each other: a name and a verb (&lsquo;Callias walks&rsquo;) or two names connected by the copula &lsquo;is&rsquo;, which co-signifies the connection (&lsquo;Pleasure is good&rsquo;) ( Int . 3). Names are either singular terms or common nouns ( An. Pr. I 27). Both can be empty ( Cat. 10, Int. 1). Singular terms can only take subject position. Verbs co-signify time. A name-verb sentence can be rephrased with the copula (&lsquo;Callias is (a) walking (thing)&rsquo;) ( Int. 12). As to their quality, a (declarative) sentence is either an affirmation or a negation, depending on whether it affirms or negates its predicate of its subject. The negation particle in a negation has wide scope ( Cat . 10). Aristotle defined truth separately for affirmations and negations: An affirmation is true if it says of that which is that it is; a negation is true if it says of that which is not that it is not ( Met . &Gamma;.7 1011b25ff). These formulations, or in any case their Greek counterparts, can be interpreted as expressing either a correspondence or a deflationist conception of truth. Either way, truth is a property that belongs to a sentence at a given time . As to their quantity, sentences are singular, universal, particular or indefinite. Thus Aristotle obtains eight types of sentences, which are later dubbed &lsquo;categorical sentences&rsquo;. The following are examples, paired by quality: Singular: Callias is just. Callias is not just. Universal: Every human is just. No human is just. Particular: Some human is just. Some human is not just. Indefinite: (A) human is just. (A) human is not just. Universal and particular sentences contain a quantifier and both universal and particular affirmatives were taken to have existential import. (See entry The Traditional Square of Opposition ). The logical status of the indefinites is ambiguous and controversial ( Int . 6&ndash;7). Aristotle distinguishes between two types of sentential opposition: contraries and contradictories. A contradictory pair of sentences (an antiphasis ) consists of an affirmation and its negation (i.e. the negation that negates of the subject what the affirmation affirms of it). Aristotle assumes that&mdash;normally&mdash;one of these must be true, the other false. Contrary sentences are such that they cannot both be true. The contradictory of a universal affirmative is the corresponding particular negative; that of the universal negative the corresponding particular affirmative. A universal affirmative and its corresponding universal negative are contraries. Aristotle thus has captured the basic logical relations between monadic quantifiers ( Int . 7). Since Aristotle regards tense as part of the truth-bearer (as opposed to merely a grammatical feature), he detects a problem regarding future tense sentences about contingent matters: Does the principle that of an affirmation and its negation one must be false, the other true, apply to these? What, for example, is the truth-value now of the sentence &lsquo;There will be a sea-battle tomorrow&rsquo;? Aristotle may have suggested that the sentence has no truth-value now, and that bivalence thus does not hold&mdash;despite the fact that it is necessary for there either to be or not to be a sea-battle tomorrow, so that the principle of excluded middle is preserved ( Int . 9). 2.4 Non-modal Syllogistic Aristotle&rsquo;s non-modal syllogistic ( Prior Analytics A 1&ndash;7) is the pinnacle of his logic. Aristotle defines a syllogism as &lsquo;an argument ( logos ) in which, certain things having been laid down, something different from what has been laid down follows of necessity because these things are so&rsquo;. This definition appears to require (i) that a syllogism consists of at least two premises and a conclusion, (ii) that the conclusion follows of necessity from the premises (so that all syllogisms are valid arguments), and (iii) that the conclusion differs from the premises. Aristotle&rsquo;s syllogistic covers only a small part of all arguments that satisfy these conditions. Aristotle restricts and regiments the types of categorical sentence that may feature in a syllogism. The admissible truth-bearers are now defined as each containing two different terms ( horoi ) conjoined by the copula, of which one (the predicate term) is said of the other (the subject term) either affirmatively or negatively. Aristotle never comes clear on the question whether terms are things (e.g., non-empty classes) or linguistic expressions for these things. Only universal and particular sentences are discussed. Singular sentences seem to be excluded and indefinite sentences are mostly ignored. At An. Pr. A 7 Aristotle mentions that by substituting an indefinite premise for a particular, one obtains a syllogism of the same kind. Another innovation in the syllogistic is Aristotle&rsquo;s use of letters in place of terms. The letters may originally have served simply as abbreviations for terms (e.g. An. Post. A 13); but in the syllogistic they seem mostly to have the function either of schematic term letters or of term variables with universal quantifiers assumed but not stated. Where he uses letters, Aristotle tends to express the four types of categorical sentences in the following way (with common later abbreviations in parentheses): &lsquo; A holds of (lit., belongs to) every B &rsquo; ( A a B ) &lsquo; A holds of no B &rsquo; ( A e B ) &lsquo; A holds of some B &rsquo; ( A i B ) &lsquo; A does not hold of some B &rsquo; ( A o B ) Instead of &lsquo;holds&rsquo; he also uses &lsquo;is predicated&rsquo;. All basic syllogisms consist of three categorical sentences, in which the two premises share exactly one term, called the middle term, and the conclusion contains the other two terms, sometimes called the extremes. Based on the position of the middle term, Aristotle classified all possible premise combinations into three figures ( sch&ecirc;mata ): the first figure has the middle term ( B ) as subject in the first premise and predicated in the second; the second figure has it predicated in both premises, the third has it as subject in both premises: I II III A holds of B B holds of A A holds of B B holds of C B holds of C C holds of B A is also called the major term, C the minor term. Each figure can further be classified according to whether or not both premises are universal. Aristotle went systematically through the fifty-eight possible premise combinations and showed that fourteen have a conclusion following of necessity from them, i.e. are syllogisms. His procedure was this: He assumed that the syllogisms of the first figure are complete and not in need of proof, since they are evident. By contrast, the syllogisms of the second and third figures are incomplete and in need of proof. He proves them by reducing them to syllogisms of the first figure and thereby &lsquo;completing&rsquo; them. For this he makes use of three methods: conversion ( antistroph&ecirc; ): a categorical sentence is converted by interchanging its terms. Aristotle recognizes and establishes three conversion rules: &lsquo;from A e B infer B e A &rsquo;; &lsquo;from A i B infer B i A &rsquo; and &lsquo;from A a B infer B i A &rsquo;. All but two second and third figure syllogisms can be proved by premise conversion. reductio ad impossibile ( apag&ocirc;g&ecirc; ): the remaining two are proved by reduction to the impossible, where the contradictory of an assumed conclusion together with one of the premises is used to deduce by a first figure syllogism a conclusion that is incompatible with the other premise. Using the semantic relations between opposites established earlier the assumed conclusion is thus established. exposition or setting-out ( ekthesis ): this method, which Aristotle uses in addition to (i) and (ii), involves choosing or &lsquo;setting out&rsquo; some additional term, say D , that falls in the non-empty intersection delimited by two premises, say AxB and AxC , and using D to justify the inference from the premises to a particular conclusion, BxC . It is debated whether &lsquo; D &rsquo; represents a singular or a general term and whether exposition constitutes proof. For each of the thirty-four premise combinations that allow no conclusion Aristotle proves by counterexample that they allow no conclusion. As his overall result, he acknowledges four first figure syllogisms (later named Barbara, Celarent, Darii, Ferio), four second figure syllogisms (Camestres, Cesare, Festino, Baroco) and six third figure syllogisms (Darapti, Felapton, Disamis, Datisi, Bocardo, Ferison); these were later called the modes or moods of the figures. (The names are mnemonics: e.g. each vowel, or the first three in cases where the name has more than three, indicates in order whether the first and second premises and the conclusion were sentences of type a , e , i or o .) Aristotle implicitly recognized that by using the conversion rules on the conclusions we obtain eight further syllogisms ( An. Pr. 53a3&ndash;14), and that of the premise combinations rejected as non-syllogistic, some (five, in fact) will yield a conclusion in which the minor term is predicated of the major ( An. Pr. 29a19&ndash;27). Moreover, in the Topics Aristotle accepted the rules &lsquo;from A a B infer A i B &rsquo; and &lsquo;from A e B infer A o B &rsquo;. By using these on t