--> Dialectical School (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy) Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Menu Browse Table of Contents What's New Random Entry Chronological Archives About Editorial Information About the SEP Editorial Board How to Cite the SEP Special Characters Advanced Tools Contact Support SEP Support the SEP PDFs for SEP Friends Make a Donation SEPIA for Libraries Entry Navigation Entry Contents Bibliography Academic Tools Friends PDF Preview Author and Citation Info Back to Top Dialectical School First published Fri Aug 27, 2004; substantive revision Wed Aug 9, 2023 The &lsquo;Dialectical School&rsquo; denotes a group of early Hellenistic philosophers that were loosely connected by philosophizing in the &mdash; Socratic &mdash; tradition of Eubulides of Miletus and by their interest in logical paradoxes, propositional logic and dialectical expertise. Its two best-known members, Diodorus Cronus and Philo the Logician, made ground-breaking contributions to the development of theories of conditionals and modal logic. Philo introduced a version of material implication; Diodorus devised a forerunner of strict implication. Each developed a system of modal notions that satisfies the basic logical requirements laid down by modern standard modal theories. In antiquity, Diodorus Cronus was famous for his so-called Master Argument, which aims to prove that only the actual is possible. 1. Historical and biographical information 2. The beginnings of propositional logic 3. Conditionals 3.1 Philonian conditionals 3.2 Diodorean Conditionals 4. Modal logic 4.1 Philonian modalities 4.2 Diodorean modalities 5. The Master Argument 6.The Reaper Argument Bibliography A. Greek or Latin Texts B. Translations C. Collections of Testimonies D. Secondary Literature Academic Tools Other Internet Resources Related Entries 1. Historical and biographical information The name &lsquo;Dialectical School&rsquo; is used for a group of philosophers active from the later 4th to the mid 3rd centuries BC who are referred to as members of the Dialectic sect ( hairesis ) or as dialecticians ( dialektikoi ) in some later ancient sources (Diogenes Laertius [DL] 1.19). Together with the Megarics, Cyrenaics and Cynics, the Dialecticians count among the minor Socratic schools. Their main philosophical interest was in dialectical skill and accomplishment, including the development and resolution of logical paradoxes. They also made several important positive contributions to the development of propositional logic. The Dialecticians were traditionally counted among the philosophers of the Megaric School, founded by Euclides of Megara, author of Socratic dialogues (Grote 1885, 1:140; M. Kneale 1937; Mates 1953; Prior 1955; W. C. Kneale and Kneale 1962, 117). In antiquity, the best-known figure from the Megaric School was Stilpo, who, like Euclides, was a native of Megara. For reasons that will become clear, scholars now typically use &lsquo;Mergaric&rsquo; as the adjective describing a philosophical grouping or position, while reserving &lsquo;Megarian&rsquo; as an adjective describing an origin in city of Megara (the same distinction is marked in Ancient Greek). More recent scholarship has placed Diodorus and Philo in a Dialectical School, separate from the Megaric School (Sedley 1977, 75 followed by Bobzien 2011; Algra 1999, 47; Ebert 1991; Ebert 2008). In fact, disagreement over the existence of a Dialectical Sect went back to antiquity. Diogenes Laertius holds that the Dialecticians are a separate &lsquo;ethical&rsquo; sect, founded by Clinomachus, but tells us that an earlier historian, Hippobotus, does not think the Dialectical is a separate sect (DL 1.19). But the modern scholarly reason for positing the Dialectical School as separate from the Megaric School has four basic elements. We should distinguish a &lsquo;lineage&rsquo; ( diadoche ) from a &lsquo;sect&rsquo; ( hairesis ), which are the two main ways ancient historiographers grouped philosophers. The first is the genealogy of a philosopher in terms of teacher-student relationships. The second is a &lsquo;school&rsquo; in the sense of set of philosophers with a shared core of doctrines, and some institutional connection, for example a series of scholarchs. Everyone agrees that Diodorus and Philo are in the lineage of Euclides of Megara. There was a Megaric Sect, which included at least Euclides and Stilpo of Megara. There was a Dialectical Sect, identified by 4th and 3rd century contemporaries, which was not just a phase of or part of the Megaric sect. It included Diodorus and Philo. The Dialectical Sect was one of the ten ethical sects identified by Diogenes Laertius (DL 1.19). (3) is the important claim for establishing that there was a separate Dialectical School. Sedley defends (3) with the following argument: Stilpo won over three students &lsquo;from the Dialecticians&rsquo; (DL 2.114). Since Stilpo was a member of the Megaric School this must mean that the &lsquo;Dialecticians&rsquo; were a separate, and rival, group from Stilpo&rsquo;s Megaric sect (Sedley 1977, 75&ndash;76). Some try to reject Sedley&rsquo;s conclusion by admitting that the Dialecticians were a group that was identified in antiquity as separate from the Megaric sect, but the Dialectical group was not, strictly, a sect in the technical sense used by ancient historiographers. The is because the Dialectical group lacked the required institutional framework, such as a succession of scholarchs or core set of doctrines (DL 1.20; D&ouml;ring 1989, 309; cf. Allen 2018, 44&ndash;46). But, of course, the Megarics also lacked such a structure. On (4), the evidence that the Dialectical group is identical to the Dialecticians mentioned at (DL 1.19), or even that there was such a sect, is weak. Diogenes places the Dialectical sect in a set of ethical sects, but no evidence attributes to any putative member of the sect any ethical views (unless one holds that fatalism is an ethical view). We can safely call Diodorus and Philo Dialecticians in the sense of belonging to a distinctive philosophical group, rival to Stilpo&rsquo;s circle, but sharing a philosophical genealogy with it. Whether this group was the Dialectical Sect, or a sect at all, in the sense used by ancient historiographers, is less certain because we do not know whether the members of the Dialectical School were connected by an institution comparable to other ancient philosophical schools, or whether their union under one name in later reports was based more loosely on their common philosophical interest in dialectic. Those later reports give Clinomachus of Thurii, a pupil of Eubulides of Miletus, as founder of the school, but may have been given this title only in hindsight (DL 1.19 and 2.112, Sedley 1977 n.16). Euphantus of Olyntus, another pupil of Eubulides, probably born before 349 BC, may have been the earliest member of the school. The name &lsquo;Dialectical School&rsquo; is reported to have been introduced by its member Dionysius of Chalcedon, active around 320 BC because of the practice of putting arguments in question and answer form (DL 2.106; Castagnoli 2010, 157). The most important philosopher of the sect is Dionysius&rsquo; contemporary, Diodorus Cronus, who taught in Athens and Alexandria around 315&ndash;284 BC. He left no writings but is the most influential member of the Dialectical School. Diodorus&rsquo; most famous pupil is Zeno of Citium, founder Stoicism. The dialectician Aristides belongs to the same generation as Diodorus Cronus. Alexinus (c. 339&ndash;265) may have belonged to the sect. The second important philosopher of the Dialectical School is the logician Philo (sometimes referred to as Philo of Megara, although we do not know his city of origin); he studied with Diodorus. He wrote a dialogue Menexenos and possibly a work On Signs and a work On Schemata . All of these are lost. Diodorus Cronus&rsquo; five daughters Menexene, Argeia, Theognis, Artemisia and Pantacleia are all said to have been logicians, and thus may have belonged to the school. Finally, the dialectician Panthoides flourished c.280&ndash;275 BC, and the dialecticians Aristoteles and Artemidorus can be dated around 250 BC. Original philosophical contributions are testified only for Diodorus Cronus and Philo, in the areas of logic, language and theory of motion (for more on Diodorus&rsquo; contributions see entries Ancient Atomism and Diodorus Cronus ); their views on logic were influential on Stoic logic, which in turn anticipated many of the developments in 20th century logic. Philosophers of the Dialectic sect had an impact also on Epicurean, Peripatetic, and Sceptic philosophy, and seem to have interacted in discussion with members of most Hellenistic philosophical schools. Diodorus Cronus&rsquo; modal theory and his Master Argument served as a major philosophical inspiration for Arthur Prior . 2. The beginnings of propositional logic All we know about the so-called founder of the so-called Dialectical School, Clinomachus of Thurii, is that he was the first who wrote about predicates ( kat&ecirc;gor&ecirc;mata ) and propositions ( axi&ocirc;mata ) and the like (DL 2.112). Our evidence for Diodorus and Philo confirms that they, too, conceived of logic as a logic of propositions. It was the Stoics who systematically developed a logic of propositions and devised subtle classifications of predicates. (By contrast, Aristotle&rsquo;s logic had been a logic of terms, where subject and predicate terms were in principle interchangeable.) The logic of the Dialectical School thus was a precursor of Stoic logic. At the time of Diodorus and Philo, a distinction between simple and non-simple propositions was in circulation among the minor Greek Socratic philosophical sects (Sextus Empiricus [SE] Against the Logicians 2.93&ndash;95). There is some dispute over whether this reference is to the Dialectical School, or merely to dialecticians in general (Ebert 1991; Barnes 1993). Following the Dialecticians, the Stoics divided simple propositions into affirmations and negations (DL 7.68; SE, Against the Logicians 2.93&ndash;95). Among non-simple propositions, which were thought to be composed of simple ones, conditionals, disjunctions and conjunctions were distinguished. Disjunctions or conditionals featured as premises in many of the logical paradoxes and sophisms which members of the Dialectical School discussed. It is likely that Diodorus and Philo examined the truth-conditions of all three kinds of non-simple propositions; however, we know their views only for the case of the conditional (see below Section 3 ). Their treatment of conditionals and modalities implies that &mdash; like most Hellenistic philosophers &mdash; Diodorus and Philo worked with a concept of proposition that differs from ours in that it allows truth-values to change over time. For instance, the standard example for a simple proposition, &lsquo;It is day&rsquo;, does not contain a covert fixed date or definite time determination; rather, it ranges over times, changing its truth-value twice daily, all the while remaining the same proposition. Thus we may think of propositions as they were understood by Hellenistic philosophers as functions of time. Diodorus Cronus can perhaps also be credited with the beginnings of temporal logic, as both his theory of the conditional and his accounts of the modalities are built on logically relevant temporal properties of propositions (see below sects. 3.2 and 4.2 ). Moreover, he distinguished between propositions in the present tense like &lsquo;Helen has three husbands&rsquo; and &lsquo;These men are marrying&rsquo; and propositions in a tense of completion (the aorist), &lsquo;Helen had three husbands&rsquo; and &lsquo;These men married&rsquo;, and observed that it is possible for propositions like the latter two to be true, without there ever having been a time at which a corresponding one of the former type was true (SE, Against the Physicists 2.97&ndash;8). See Crivelli 1994; Duncombe 2023. Apart from the various logical puzzles and sophisms, there are only two topics on which we can be sure of a positive contribution to logic by members of the Dialectical School. These are the positions of Diodorus and Philo on the theory of conditionals and on modal logic. Both topics involve notorious difficulties and were extensively and intensely discussed by Hellenistic logicians; so much so that the disputes became part of the general knowledge of the intelligentsia of the time (SE, Against the Grammarians 309&ndash;10). Moreover, the theory of modalities was believed to have far-reaching results for other areas of philosophy. 3. Conditionals In the debate about the conditional ( sun&ecirc;mmenon ) the point of disagreement concerned the right truth-conditions of a conditional (Cicero, Academics II 143). This controversy was played out against the background of a common acceptance of what counts as a conditional, and what its function is. Conditionals were understood to be non-simple propositions containing one proposition as antecedent and one as consequent. The antecedent has the particle &lsquo;if&rsquo; prefixed to it; the standard form is &lsquo;If p , q &rsquo;. A conditional serves to manifest the relation of consequence ( akolouthia ): it announces that its consequent follows from ( akolouthein ) its antecedent (SE, Against the Logicians 2.110&ndash;112). This relation of consequence was also commonly taken to manifest the relation between premises and conclusion in a valid argument. 3.1 Philonian conditionals Philo&rsquo;s criterion for the truth of a conditional is truth-functional. Later in antiquity, it was generally accepted as a minimal condition for the truth of a conditional. Philo maintained that a conditional is false when and only when its antecedent is true and its consequent false, and true in the three remaining cases: whenever the antecedent is false, and when both antecedent and consequent are true (SE, Against the Logicians 2.113&ndash;114). Thus, the Philonian conditional is false only in cases like &lsquo;if it is day, it is night&rsquo;, since when it is day, &lsquo;it is day is true, but &lsquo;it is night&rsquo; is false (SE Against the logicians 2.115).Thus this notion of a conditional comes very close to that of modern material implication (Hurst 1935, 485; Heal 2022). (It is not the same, since truth for Hellenistic philosophers is relativized to times.) Philo&rsquo;s suggestion is remarkable in that it deviates noticeably from the ordinary language understanding of conditional sentences and requires abstraction on the basis of a concept of truth-functionality. Remarkable as it is, Philo&rsquo;s view has the following two drawbacks: First, as in the case of material implication, for the truth of the conditional no connection of content between antecedent and consequent is required. Thus a Philonian conditional will be true whenever the consequent is true, for example, during the day &lsquo;If virtue benefits, it is day&rsquo; is Philonian true. Likewise, a Philonian conditional will be true whenever the antecedent is false, for example, during the day &lsquo;if it is night, it is day&rsquo; is Philonian true. This introduces a variant of the so-called &lsquo;paradoxes of material implication&rsquo; ( Relevance Logic, Conditionals 2.3; Lemmon 59&ndash;60, 82). The presentation of Philo&rsquo;s view in our sources shows that the ancients were aware of this problem (SE, ibid. 113&ndash;117). Second, due to the time-dependency of Hellenistic propositions, Philo&rsquo;s criterion implies that conditionals can change their truth-value over time: for instance, &lsquo;If it is day, it is night&rsquo; is true at night, but false during the day. This is counter-intuitive as regards the ordinary use of if-sentences. Moreover, as the concept of a conditional was also meant to provide for logical consequence between premises and conclusion, this leads to the problematic result that arguments can in principle change from being valid to being invalid and vice versa. 3.2 Diodorean Conditionals For Diodorus, a conditional proposition is true if it neither was nor is possible that its antecedent is true and its consequent false (SE, Against the Logicians 2.115&ndash;117). The reference to time in this account (&lsquo;was &hellip; is possible&rsquo;) suggests that the possibility of a truth-value change left open by Philo&rsquo;s truth-condition was one of the factors to be improved on. We do not know whether Diodorus had his own modal notions in mind when talking about possibility in his criterion, or just some pre-technical, general concept of possibility, or whether he perhaps intended to cover both (Denyer 1981, 39&ndash;41; Sedley 1977, 101&ndash;2). (The verb used here for being possible, endechesthai differs from the word used for possibility in Diodorus&rsquo; modal theory, which is dunaton .) If one assumes that he had his own modal notions in view when giving this account (see Section 4.2 below), his truth-criterion for the conditional stands in the following relation to Philo&rsquo;s: a conditional is Diodorean true now if and only if it is Philonian true at all times. Diodorus has, as it were, quantified the Philonian criterion over time. The conditional &lsquo;If I walk, I move&rsquo; is now true because at no time is the antecedent true and the consequent false. Thus for Diodorus, a conditional cannot change its truth-value. If it is true (false) at one time, it is true (false) at all times. If on the other hand one assumes that Diodorus had some unspecified general notion of possibility in mind when producing his account, the criterion will be correspondingly less specific. However, it would presumably still be a minimal requirement that it is never the case that the antecedent is true and the consequent false. Diodorus&rsquo; criterion bears some resemblance to the modern concept of strict implication, although the exact relation between Diodorean and strict conditionals is controversial (see Hurst 1935; Mates 1949; H&aacute;jek 2009). What is clear is that Diodorean conditionals share some disadvantages of strict conditionals, in that we encounter a parallel to the &lsquo;paradoxes of strict implication&rsquo; (Lemmon 1965, 153&ndash;4). As in Philo&rsquo;s case, no connection of content is required between antecedent and consequent. This time, whenever either the antecedent is impossible or the consequent necessary, the conditional will be true, regardless of whether there is any relevant connection between the two constituent propositions. So for instance &lsquo;If the earth flies, Axiothea philosophizes&rsquo; would be true for Diodorus, since the antecedent was considered impossible (DL 7.75), while &lsquo;If Axiothena philosophizes, virtue is beneficial&rsquo; would be a true Diodorean conditional, since the consequent was considered necessary (DL 7.75) One example given of a Diodorean-true conditional, &lsquo;If it is not the case that there are indivisible elements of things, then there are indivisible elements of things&rsquo; (SE, Outlines of Pyrrhonism 2.111), suggests that there was some awareness of these paradoxes in antiquity. In any event, the Stoic Chrysippus developed a system of relevance logic in which neither the &lsquo;paradoxes of material implication&rsquo; nor the &lsquo;paradoxes of strict implication&rsquo; occur. 4. Modal logic Modal logic is the second topic where we have evidence about the positions of Philo and Diodorus and their influence on the Stoics (Kneale and Kneale 1962, 117&ndash;28; Bobzien 1993; de Harven 2016). Although the modalities were generally discussed under the heading of &lsquo;On things possible&rsquo;, the Hellenistic modal systems were each built on a set of four modalities: possibility, impossibility, necessity and non-necessity. The matter of dispute was which system was the right one; that is, which one adequately described the modalities inherent in the world. In connection with this, an extra-logical concern provided additional fuel to the debate: the belief that if propositions stating future events that will not happen all turn out to be impossible, the freedom and choices of individuals would be curtailed. This is a variation on the problem of logical determinism which is known from Aristotle&rsquo;s On Interpretation 9. Several of the arguments devised and discussed by the Dialectical School touch upon this issue &mdash; the Reaper Argument, the Lazy Argument (Bobzien 1998, 78&ndash;81, 180&ndash;233), and the Master Argument. For Diodorus and Philo, as for the Stoics the modalities were primarily considered as properties of propositions or states of affairs. There is no discussion of modal propositions, i.e. of propositions that contain modal operators, such as &lsquo;It is possible that it is day&rsquo; or &lsquo;It is necessary that virtue benefits&rsquo;, nor of iterated modalities. 4.1 Philonian modalities Philo&rsquo;s view on possibility has survived in several other sources (Alexander, On Aristotle&rsquo;s Prior Analytics 184; Philoponus, On Aristotle&rsquo;s Prior Analytics 169) but only in one are his accounts of all four modal notions reported: Possible is that which is capable of being true by the proposition&rsquo;s own nature &hellip; necessary is that which is true, and which, as far as it is in itself, is not capable of being wrong. Non-necessary is that which, as far as it is in itself, is capable of being false, and impossible is that which by its own nature is not capable of being true. (Boethius, On Aristotle&rsquo;s On Interpretation 2, II 234) So according to Boethius the basic feature of Philonian modalities is some intrinsic capability of the propositions to be or not to be true or false. That this feature is intrinsic is plain from the phrases &lsquo;by its own nature&rsquo; and &lsquo;in itself&rsquo;. In one source, both phrases are used to characterize Philonian possibility (Simplicius, On Aristotle&rsquo;s Categories 195); hence both phrases may have originally applied to all four accounts. Philo&rsquo;s notion of possibility is often thought to be a broad notion of logical possibility (de Harven 2016, 3&ndash;4) with the only constraint on a proposition being possible being that it is a matter of logical consistency. Sometimes our sources seem to ground this consistency in the intrinsic features of the subject of that proposition. For example, according to Philo &lsquo;this piece of wood burns at the bottom of the ocean&rsquo; is possible, since the intrinsic features of the wood give it the power to burn (Alexander On Aristotle&rsquo;s Prior Analytics 184.7&ndash;9; Simplicius On Aristotle&rsquo;s Categories 195,30&ndash;196, 3), and, presumably, there is no logical contradiction in saying &lsquo;this piece of wood burns at the bottom of the ocean&rsquo;. It is just that the extrinsic circumstances of being in the ocean prevent the wood from burning (Bobzien 1993, 77). However, it is unclear whether this explanation is wholly adequate, since &lsquo;preventing&rsquo; is itself a modal notion, so this explanation of the evidence risks circularity. In all sources the concept of possibility stands out, and so it seems likely that Philo built his set of modal notions on a concept of internal consistency, as given in his account of possibility. Philo&rsquo;s modal concepts are thus defined by resort to another, perhaps more basic, modal concept. As to the kind of logical consistency Philo had in mind, we learn nothing more. Notwithstanding this, there can be little doubt that Philo&rsquo;s modal concepts satisfy a number of basic requirements which normal systems of modern modal logic tend to satisfy, too. (We assume here that Philo accepted the principle of bivalence, as we have no contrary information.) These requirements are: Every necessary proposition is true and every true prop