Write your business plan | U.S. Small Business Administration Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Menu Primary Navigation Business Guide Explore our business guide 10 steps to start your business Plan your business Market research and competitive analysis Write your business plan Calculate your startup costs Establish business credit Fund your business Buy an existing business or franchise Launch your business Pick your business location Choose a business structure Choose your business name Register your business Get federal and state tax ID numbers Apply for licenses and permits Open a business bank account Get business insurance Manage your business Manage your finances Hire and manage employees Pay taxes Stay legally compliant Buy assets and equipment Marketing and sales AI for small business Strengthen your cybersecurity Prepare for emergencies Recover from disasters Close or sell your business Hire employees with disabilities Grow your business Get more funding Expand to new locations Merge and acquire businesses Become a federal contractor Export products Women-owned businesses Native American-owned businesses Veteran-owned businesses Military spouse businesses Rural businesses Minority-owned businesses Funding Programs Find funding programs Loans Make a payment to SBA 7(a) loans 504 loans Microloans Lender Match COVID-19 relief options Investment capital SBIC directory Disaster assistance Options to bypass permitting delays Alaska floods Texas floods California wildfires Hurricane Helene Physical damage loans Mitigation assistance Economic Injury Disaster Loans Military reservist loan Surety bonds Surety bond agency directory Grants Manufacturing grants State Trade Expansion Program (STEP) Grants for community organizations Federal Contracting Learn about federal contracting Contracting guide Assess your business Basic requirements How to win contracts Types of contracts Size standards Governing rules and responsibilities Prime and subcontracting Contracting assistance programs Women-Owned Small Business Federal Contract program Veteran contracting assistance programs 8(a) Business Development program SBA Mentor-Protégé program Joint ventures HUBZone program Natural Resource Sales Assistance program Counseling and help Contracting area directors Procurement Center Representative directory Commercial Market Representatives Contracting data Small business procurement scorecard Procurement data hub Learning Platform Explore our learning platform SBA Learning Boots to Business Empower to Grow Local Assistance Find resources in your area Resource Partners Small Business Development Centers (SBDC) SCORE Business Mentoring Veterans Business Outreach Centers (VBOC) Women&#039;s Business Centers Export and trade assistance Finance Managers U.S. Export Assistance Centers Federal contracting assistance Regional Innovation Clusters Veterans Business Development Officers Priorities Discover SBA&#039;s priorities Putting American manufacturers first Cutting red tape for small manufacturers Increasing access to capital Make Onshoring Great Again portal Taking your manufacturing business global Manufacturing success stories Small business resource hubs Child care business development support Interagency capital resources for small businesses SBA initiatives Freedom 250 Community Builders Network Small Businesses Against Trafficking in Persons (SBATiP) Councils and committees National Small Business Development Center Advisory Board Invention, Innovation, and Entrepreneurship Advisory Committee Investment Capital Advisory Committee Small Business Lending Advisory Council Regional Regulatory Fairness Boards About SBA Learn about SBA SBA locations Headquarters Offices Disaster Offices District Offices Loan and Guaranty Centers Open government FOIA Digital SBA About the SBA.gov website SBA privacy program Privacy Act request guide Information quality SBA guidance AI inventory Made in America waivers SMS terms and conditions SBA Newsroom Work for SBA Employee life Jobs at SBA Contracting for SBA Disaster response jobs at SBA Organization SBA leadership Contact SBA Forms and documents Observances Performance Federal advisory committees Oversight and advocacy Office of Hearings and Appeals Office of Inspector General Office of the National Ombudsman Office of Advocacy For Partners Newsroom Contact us Search Breadcrumb Home Business Guide Plan your business Write your business plan Section navigation 10 steps to start your business Plan your business Market research and competitive analysis Write your business plan Calculate your startup costs Establish business credit Fund your business Buy an existing business or franchise Launch your business Manage your business Grow your business Write your business plan Your business plan is the foundation of your business. Learn how to write a business plan quickly and efficiently with a business plan template. Content Business plans help you run your business A good business plan guides you through each stage of starting and managing your business. You’ll use your business plan as a roadmap for how to structure, run, and grow your new business. It’s a way to think through the key elements of your business. Your research can also help you later in your planning. For example, knowing your NAICS code could help you with market analysis, insurance, and taxes. Business plans can help you get funding or bring on new business partners. Investors want to feel confident they’ll see a return on their investment. Your business plan is the tool you’ll use to convince people that working with you — or investing in your company — is a smart choice. Pick a business plan format that works for you There’s no right or wrong way to write a business plan. What’s important is that your plan meets your needs. Most business plans fall into one of two common categories: traditional or lean startup. Traditional business plans are more common, use a standard structure, and encourage you to go into detail in each section. They tend to require more work upfront and can be dozens of pages long. Lean startup business plans are less common but still use a standard structure. They focus on summarizing only the most important points of the key elements of your plan. They can take as little as one hour to make and are typically only one page. &nbsp; Traditional business plan This type of plan is very detailed, takes more time to write, and is comprehensive. Lenders and investors commonly request this plan. Lean startup plan This type of plan is high-level focus, fast to write, and contains key elements only. Some lenders and investors may ask for more information. Traditional business plan format Use our tips to build your own traditional business plan, or download examples. General guidance You might prefer a traditional business plan format if you’re very detail-oriented, want a comprehensive plan, or plan to request financing from traditional sources. When you write your business plan, you don’t have to stick to the exact business plan outline. Instead, use the sections that make the most sense for your business and your needs. Explore the nine most common sections, or download fictional examples of a traditional business plan from Rebecca, who owns a consulting firm, or Andrew, who owns a toy company. Common traditional business plan sections Executive summary Briefly tell your reader what your company is and why it will be successful. Include your mission statement, your product or service, and basic information about your company’s leadership team, employees, and location. You should also include financial information and high-level growth plans if you plan to ask for financing. Company description Use your company description to provide detailed information about your company. Go into detail about the problems your business solves. Be specific, and list out the consumers, organization, or businesses your company plans to serve. Explain the competitive advantages that will make your business a success. Are there experts on your team? Have you found the perfect location for your store? Your company description is the place to boast about your strengths. Market analysis You'll need a good understanding of your industry outlook and target market. Competitive research will show you what other businesses are doing and what their strengths are. In your market research, look for trends and themes. What do successful competitors do? Why does it work? Can you do it better? Now's the time to answer these questions. Organization and management Tell your reader how your company will be structured and who will run it. Describe the&nbsp; legal structure &nbsp;of your business. State whether you have or intend to incorporate your business as a C or an S corporation, form a general or limited partnership, or if you're a sole proprietor or limited liability company (LLC). Use an organizational chart to lay out who's in charge of what in your company. Show how each person's unique experience will contribute to the success of your venture. Consider including resumes and CVs of key members of your team. Service or product line Describe what you sell or what service you offer. Explain how it benefits your customers and what the product lifecycle looks like. Share your plans for intellectual property, like copyright or patent filings. If you're doing&nbsp; research and development &nbsp;for your service or product, explain it in detail. Marketing and sales There's no single way to approach a marketing strategy. Your strategy should evolve and change to fit your unique needs. Your goal in this section is to describe how you'll attract and retain customers. You'll also describe how a sale will actually happen. You'll refer to this section later when you make financial projections, so make sure to thoroughly describe your complete marketing and sales strategies. Funding request If you're asking for funding, this is where you'll outline your funding requirements. Your goal is to clearly explain how much funding you’ll need over the next five years and what you'll use it for. Specify whether you want debt or equity, the terms you'd like applied, and the length of time your request will cover. Give a detailed description of how you'll use your funds. Specify if you need funds to buy equipment or materials, pay salaries, or cover specific bills until revenue increases. Always include a description of your future strategic financial plans, like paying off debt or selling your business. Financial projections Supplement your funding request with financial projections. Your goal is to convince the reader that your business is stable and will be a financial success. If your business is already established, include income statements, balance sheets, and cash flow statements for the last three to five years. If you have other collateral you could put against a loan, make sure to list it now. Provide a prospective financial outlook for the next five years. Include forecasted income statements, balance sheets, cash flow statements, and capital expenditure budgets. For the first year, be even more specific and use quarterly — or even monthly — projections. Make sure to clearly explain your projections, and match them to your funding requests. This is a great place to use graphs and charts to tell the financial story of your business. &nbsp; Appendix Use your appendix to provide supporting documents or other materials were specially requested. Common items to include are credit histories, resumes, product pictures, letters of reference, licenses, permits, patents, legal documents, and other contracts. Download Rebecca&#039;s traditional business plan Download Andrew&#039;s traditional business plan Lean startup format Use our tips to build your own lean startup plan, or download examples. General guidance You might prefer a lean startup format if you want to explain or start your business quickly, your business is relatively simple, or you plan to regularly change and refine your business plan. Lean startup formats are charts that use only a handful of elements to describe your company’s value proposition, infrastructure, customers, and finances. They’re useful for visualizing tradeoffs and fundamental facts about your company. Explore the nine most common sections, or download an example of a lean startup business plan written by a fictional business owner, Andrew, who owns a toy company. Common lean startup plan sections There are different ways to develop a lean startup template. You can search the web to find free templates to build your business plan.&nbsp;We&nbsp;discuss&nbsp;nine components of a model business&nbsp;plan&nbsp;here: Key partnerships Note the other businesses or services you’ll work with to run your business. Think about suppliers, manufacturers, subcontractors, and similar strategic partners. Key activities List the ways your business will gain a competitive advantage. Highlight things like selling direct to consumers, or using technology to tap into the sharing economy. Key resources List any resource you’ll leverage to create value for your customer. Your most important assets could include staff, capital, or intellectual property. Don’t forget to leverage business resources that might be available to&nbsp; women ,&nbsp; veterans ,&nbsp; Native Americans , and&nbsp; HUBZone businesses . Value proposition Make a clear and compelling statement about the unique value your company brings to the market. Customer relationships Describe how customers will interact with your business. Is it automated or personal? In person or online? Think through the customer experience from start to finish. Customer segments Be specific when you name your target market. Your business won’t be for everybody, so it’s important to have a clear sense of whom your business will serve. Channels List the most important ways you’ll talk to your customers. Most businesses use a mix of channels and optimize them over time. Cost structure Will your company focus on reducing cost or maximizing value? Define your strategy, then list the most significant costs you’ll face pursuing it. Revenue streams Explain how your company will actually make money. Some examples are direct sales, memberships fees, and selling advertising space. If your company has multiple revenue streams, list them all. Download Andrew&#039;s lean business plan Need help? Get free business counseling Find counselors Short URL: sba.gov/business-plan Last updated November 13, 2025 Return to top Footer navigation About SBA Contact SBA Locations Upcoming events Newsroom SBA blog Leadership team About the site Site map Privacy policy Linking policy Plain language Accessibility Disclaimers Open government Freedom of Information Act No Fear Act Open data sources Policies and guidance Budget and performance Regulations.gov Oversight Inspector General Advocacy Hearings and appeals Ombudsman Fraud and identity theft WhiteHouse.gov USA.gov Sign up Receive information about upcoming SBA events, news alerts, and program updates. * indicates a required field Email ZIP Code Your information will only be used in accordance with our website privacy policy . U.S. Small Business Administration 409 3rd St., SW Washington, DC 20416 800-827-5722