Physics II: Electricity and Magnetism | Physics | MIT OpenCourseWare Browse Course Material ELECTROSTATICS MAGNETIC FIELDS AND FORCES MAXWELL&#39;S EQUATIONS Course Info Instructors Dr. Peter Dourmashkin Dr. Michelle Tomasik Prof. Krishna Rajagopal Analia Barrantes Prof. Robert Redwine Departments Physics As Taught In Spring 2019 Level Undergraduate Topics Science Physics Electromagnetism Learning Resource Types theaters Lecture Videos menu search Give Now About OCW Help &amp; Faqs Contact Us search GIVE NOW about ocw help &amp; faqs contact us 8.02 | Spring 2019 | Undergraduate Physics II: Electricity and Magnetism Menu ELECTROSTATICS MAGNETIC FIELDS AND FORCES MAXWELL&#39;S EQUATIONS Course Description Electricity and magnetism dominate much of the world around us – from the most fundamental processes in nature to cutting-edge electronic devices. Electric and magnetic fields arise from charged particles. Charged particles also feel forces in electric and magnetic fields. Maxwell’s equations, in addition to describing … Show more Electricity and magnetism dominate much of the world around us – from the most fundamental processes in nature to cutting-edge electronic devices. Electric and magnetic fields arise from charged particles. Charged particles also feel forces in electric and magnetic fields. Maxwell’s equations, in addition to describing this behavior, also describe electromagnetic radiation. The three-course series comprises: 8.02.1x : Electrostatics 8.02.2x : Magnetic Fields and Forces 8.02.3x : Maxwell’s Equations This course was organized as a three-part series on MITx by MIT’s Department of Physics and is now archived on the Open Learning Library , which is free to use. You have the option to sign up and enroll in each module if you want to track your progress, or you can view and use all the materials without enrolling. Show less Course Info Instructors Dr. Peter Dourmashkin Dr. Michelle Tomasik Prof. Krishna Rajagopal Analia Barrantes Prof. Robert Redwine Departments Physics Topics Science Physics Electromagnetism Learning Resource Types theaters Lecture Videos Electric field for positive (left) and negative (right) charges. (Image by Peter Dourmashkin.) Over 2,500 courses & materials Freely sharing knowledge with learners and educators around the world. Learn more © 2001–2026 Massachusetts Institute of Technology Accessibility Creative Commons License Terms and Conditions Proud member of: © 2001–2026 Massachusetts Institute of Technology You are leaving MIT OpenCourseWare close Please be advised that external sites may have terms and conditions, including license rights, that differ from ours. MIT OCW is not responsible for any content on third party sites, nor does a link suggest an endorsement of those sites and/or their content. Stay Here Continue