Geography Education Sign In Menu Donate ARTICLE ARTICLE Geography Geography Geography is the study of places and the relationships between people and their environments. Grades 9 - 12+ Subjects Earth Science, Geography, Human Geography, Physical Geography Loading ... Share on Twitter Share on Facebook Share on Pinterest Share on Google Classroom Share on MS Teams Share via email Print Article Vocabulary Learning materials Maps National Geographic MapMaker Articles &amp; Profiles Meet National Geographic Explorers Whose Work Involves Geography Note: As of March 2025, we have split this popular resource into two separate articles: Geography, provided below, and The History of Geography, found here . -- Geography is the study of places and the relationships between people and their environments. Geographers explore both the physical properties of Earth’s surface and the human societies spread across it. They also examine how human culture interacts with the natural environment and the way that locations and places can have an impact on people. Geography seeks to understand where things are found, why they are there and how they develop and change over time. Geography is interdisciplinary, meaning that it is not defined by one particular topic. Instead, geography is concerned with many different topics, including people, culture, politics, settlements, plants, landforms and much more. In fact, every academic subject has some geographic connection. Geochemists study where certain chemical elements, such as gold or silver, can be found. Economists examine which nations trade with other nations and what resources are exchanged. Philosophers analyze the responsibility people have to take care of Earth. Geography asks spatial questions, such as how and why things are distributed or arranged in particular ways on Earth’s surface. It looks at these different distributions and arrangements at many different scales. It also asks questions about how the interaction of different human and natural activities on Earth’s surface shape the characteristics of the world in which we live. Geography seeks to understand where things are found and why they are present in those places; how things that are located in the same or distant places influence one another over time; and why places and the people who live in them develop and change in particular ways. Raising these questions is at the heart of the “ geographic perspective .” Exploration has long been an important part of geography, and it is an important part of developing a geographic perspective. Exploration is not limited to visiting unfamiliar places; it also means documenting and connecting relationships between spatial, sociological and ecological elements. The age-old practice of mapping still plays an important role in this type of exploration, but exploration can also be done by using images from satellites or gathering information from interviews. Discoveries can come by using computers to map and analyze the relationship among things in geographic space, or from piecing together the multiple forces, near and far, that shape the way individual places develop. Applying a geographic perspective demonstrates geography’s concern not just with where things are, but with “the why of where”—a short but useful definition of geography’s central focus. The insights that have come from geographic research show the importance of asking “the why of where” questions. Geographic studies comparing physical characteristics of continents on either side of the Atlantic Ocean, for instance, gave rise to the idea that Earth’s surface is comprised of large, slowly moving plates, known as plate tectonics. Investigations of the geographic impact of human activities have advanced understanding of the role of humans in transforming the surface of Earth, exposing the spatial extent of threats such as water pollution by artificial waste. For example, geographic study has shown that a large mass of tiny pieces of plastic currently floating in the Pacific Ocean is approximately the size of Texas. Satellite images and other geographic technology identified the so-called “Great Pacific Garbage Patch.” These examples of different uses of the geographic perspective help explain why geographic study and research is important as we confront many 21st-century challenges, including environmental pollution, poverty, hunger and ethnic or political conflict. Because the study of geography is so broad, the discipline is typically divided into specialties. At the broadest level, geography is divided into physical geography, human geography and environmental geography. Geographic techniques are also a significant area of study. Physical Geography The natural environment is the primary concern of physical geographers, although many physical geographers also look at how humans have altered natural systems. Physical geographers study Earth’s seasons, climate, atmosphere, soil, streams, landforms and oceans. Some disciplines within physical geography include geomorphology, glaciology, pedology, hydrology, climatology, biogeography and oceanography. Geomorphology is the study of landforms and the processes that shape them. Geomorphologists investigate the nature and impact of wind, ice, rivers, erosion, earthquakes, volcanoes, living things and other forces that shape and change the surface of Earth. Glaciologists focus on Earth’s ice fields and their impact on the planet’s climate. Glaciologists document the properties and distribution of glaciers and icebergs. Data collected by glaciologists has demonstrated the retreat of Arctic and Antarctic ice in the past century. Pedologists study soil and how it is created, changed and classified. Soil studies are used by a variety of professions, from farmers analyzing field fertility to engineers investigating the suitability of different areas for building heavy structures. Hydrology is the study of Earth’s water, including its properties, distribution and effects. Hydrologists are especially concerned with the movement of water as it cycles from the ocean to the atmosphere, then back to Earth’s surface. Hydrologists study the water cycle through rainfall into streams, lakes, soil and underground aquifers. Hydrologists provide insights that are critical to building or removing dams, designing irrigation systems, monitoring water quality, tracking drought conditions and predicting flood risk. Climatologists study Earth’s climate system and its impact on Earth’s surface. For example, climatologists make predictions about El Niño, a cyclical weather phenomenon of warm surface temperatures in the Pacific Ocean. They analyze the dramatic worldwide climate changes caused by El Niño, such as flooding in Peru, drought in Australia and, in the United States, the oddities of heavy Texas rains or an unseasonably warm Minnesota winter. Today, climatologists are playing a vital role in studying the global impact of climate change. Human activities, like deforestation and the burning of fossil fuels, are heating up Earth’s atmosphere and ocean basins, leading to accelerated climate change. People and ecosystems around the world are affected by climate change–induced flooding, droughts, heatwaves, wildfires and rising sea levels. Scientists in many different fields are using the tools of geography to map and track the impact of climate change around the globe. Biogeographers study the impact of the environment on the distribution of plants and animals. For example, a biogeographer might document all the places in the world inhabited by a certain spider species and what those places have in common. Oceanography, a related discipline of physical geography, focuses on the creatures and environments of the world’s oceans. Observation of ocean tides and currents constituted some of the first oceanographic investigations. For example, 18th-century mariners figured out the geography of the Gulf Stream, a massive current that flows like a river through the Atlantic Ocean. The discovery and tracking of the Gulf Stream helped communications and travel between Europe and the Americas. Today, oceanographers conduct research on the impacts of water pollution, track tsunamis, design offshore oil rigs, investigate underwater eruptions of lava and study all types of marine organisms from toxic algae to friendly dolphins. Human Geography Human geography is concerned with the distribution and networks of people and cultures on Earth’s surface. A human geographer might investigate the local, regional and global impact of rising economic powers China and India, which represent nearly 36 percent of the world’s population. They also might look at how consumers in China and India adjust to new technology and markets, as well as how markets respond to such a huge consumer base. Human geographers also study how people use and alter their environments. When, for example, people allow their animals to overgraze a region, the soil erodes and grassland is transformed into desert. The impact of both overgrazing and agricultural production on a landscape is an area of study for human geographers. Finally, human geographers study how political, social and economic systems are organized across geographical space. These include governments, religious organizations and trade partnerships. The boundaries of these groups constantly change. The main divisions within human geography reflect a concern with different types of human activities or ways of living. Some examples of human geography include urban geography, economic geography, cultural geography, political geography, social geography and population geography. Human geographers who study geographic patterns and processes in past times are part of the subdiscipline of historical geography. Those who study how human psychology impacts behavior in a geographic space belong to a subdiscipline known as behavioral geography. Human geographers interested in the relationship between humans and the environment often work in the subdisciplines of cultural geography and political geography. Cultural geographers study how the natural environment influences the development of human culture, such as how the climate affects the agricultural practices of a region. Political geographers study the impact of political circumstances on interactions between people and their environment, as well as environmental conflicts, such as disputes over water rights. Some human geographers focus on the connection between human health and geography. For example, health geographers create maps that track the location and spread of specific diseases. They analyze the geographic disparities of healthcare access. They are very interested in the impact of the environment on human health, especially the effects of environmental hazards such as radiation, lead poisoning or water pollution. Geographic Techniques Specialists in geographic techniques study the ways in which geographic processes can be analyzed and represented using different methods and technologies. Mapmaking, or cartography, is perhaps the most basic of these. Cartography has been instrumental to geography throughout the ages. Today, almost the entire surface of Earth has been mapped with remarkable accuracy, and much of this information is available instantly on the internet. One of the most remarkable of these websites is Google Earth, which “lets you fly anywhere on Earth to view satellite imagery, maps, terrain, 3D buildings, from galaxies in outer space to the canyons of the ocean.” In essence, anyone can be a virtual explorer from the comfort of their home. Technological developments during the past 100 years have given rise to a number of other specialties for scientists studying geographic techniques. Airplanes made it possible to photograph land from above. Now, there are many satellites and other above-Earth vehicles that help geographers figure out what the surface of the planet looks like and how it is changing. Geographers looking at what above-Earth cameras and sensors reveal are specialists in remote sensing. Pictures taken from space can be used to make maps, monitor ice melt, assess flood damage, track oil spills, predict weather and perform endless other functions. For example, by comparing satellite photos taken from 1955 to 2007, scientists from the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) discovered that the rate of coastal erosion along Alaska’s Beaufort Sea had doubled. Every year from 2002 to 2007, about 13.7 meters (45 feet) per year of coast, mostly icy permafrost, vanished into the sea. Computerized systems that allow for precise calculations of how things are distributed and relate to one another have made the study of geographic information systems (GIS) an increasingly important specialty within geography. GIS are powerful databases that collect all types of information (maps, reports, statistics, satellite images, surveys, demographic data and more) and link each piece of data to a geographic reference point, such as geographic coordinates. This data, called geospatial information, can be stored, analyzed, modeled and manipulated in ways not possible before GIS computer technology existed. The popularity and importance of GIS has given rise to a new science known as geographic information science (GISci). Geographic information scientists study patterns in nature as well as human development. They might study natural hazards, such as a fire that struck Los Angeles, California, United States, in 2008. A map posted on the internet showed the real-time spread of the fire, along with information to help people make decisions about how to evacuate quickly. GIS also allowed Digital Earth Africa, an initiative launched in 2019, to make Earth observation data (satellite imagery) of the continent free and accessible. Its data sets and maps focus on analyzing changes in water resources, coastal erosion and food security throughout the continent. By increasing accessibility of GIS data, Digital Earth Africa aims to improve the lives of African people. Digital Earth Africa’s cropland extent map, for example, helped scientists realize that the countries of Ethiopia and Burkina Faso need more assistance to grow enough food to sustain their livestock. The enormous possibilities for producing computerized maps and diagrams that can help us understand environmental and social problems have made geographic visualization an increasingly important specialty within geography. This geospatial information is in high demand by just about every institution, from government agencies monitoring health data to entrepreneurs deciding where to locate new businesses. Regional Geography Regional geographers take a somewhat different approach to specialization, directing their attention to the general geographic characteristics of a region. A regional geographer might specialize in African studies, observing and documenting the people, nations, rivers, mountains, deserts, weather, trade and other attributes of the continent. There are different ways to define a region, such as by climate zones, cultural regions or political regions. Often regional geographers have a physical or human geography specialty as well as a regional specialty. Regional geographers may also study smaller regions, such as urban areas. A regional geographer may be interested in the way a city like Shanghai, China, is growing. They would study transportation, migration, housing and language, as well as the human impact on elements of the natural environment, such as the Huangpu River. Whether geography is thought of as a discipline or as a basic feature of our world, developing an understanding of the subject is important. Some grasp of geography is essential as people seek to make sense of the world and understand their place in it. Thinking geographically helps people to be aware of the connections among and between places and to see how important events are shaped by where they take place. Finally, knowing something about geography enriches people’s lives—promoting curiosity about other people and places and an appreciation of the patterns, environments and peoples that make up the endlessly fascinating, varied planet on which we live. Credits Media Credits The audio, illustrations, photos, and videos are credited beneath the media asset, except for promotional images, which generally link to another page that contains the media credit. The Rights Holder for media is the person or group credited. Reviewer CSA Education Writers The Wise Apple Diane Boudreau Audrey Carangelo Hilary Costa Joe Jaszewski Melissa McDaniel Tara Ramroop Erin Sprout Santani Teng Andrew Turgeon Principal Author Alexander Murphy, Professor of Geography and Rippey Chair in Liberal Arts and Sciences, Department of Geography, University of Oregon Editors Jeannie Evers, Emdash Editing , Emdash Editing Jeff Hunt Kim Rutledge Kara West Educator Reviewer Nancy Wynne Expert Reviewer Daniel Edelson, Vice President, National Geographic Education Lindsey Mohan, Ph.D. Sarah Wilson, National Geographic Society Producer National Geographic Society other Last Updated January 15, 2026 User Permissions For information on user permissions, please read our Terms of Service. If you have questions about how to cite anything on our website in your project or classroom presentation, please contact your teacher. They will best know the preferred format. When you reach out to them, you will need the page title, URL, and the date you accessed the resource. Media If a media asset is downloadable, a download button appears in the corner of the media viewer. If no button appears, you cannot download or save the media. Text Text on this page is printable and can be used according to our Terms of Service . Interactives Any interactives on this page can only be played while you are visiting our website. You cannot download interactives. Related Resources National Geographic Headquarters 1145 17th Street NW Washington, DC 20036 ABOUT National Geographic Society NatGeo.com News and Impact Contact Us Explore Our Explorers Our Programs Education Museum Of Exploration National Geographic Live Storytellers Collective Traveling Exhibitions Join Us Ways to Give Apply for a Grant Careers donate get updates Connect National Geographic Society is a 501 (c)(3) organization. © 1996 - 2026 National Geographic Society. All rights reserved. Code of Ethics | State Disclosures | Terms of Service | Privacy Notice | Your Privacy Choices