Cyber Threats and Response | Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency CISA Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock A locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Due to the lapse in federal funding, this website will not be actively managed. &nbsp; Read More no-cost Cyber Services Secure by design&nbsp; Secure Your Business Shields Up Report A Cyber Issue &nbsp; Search &nbsp; Menu Close &nbsp; Topics Topics Cybersecurity Best Practices Cyber Threats and Response Critical Infrastructure Security and Resilience Election Security Emergency Communications Industrial Control Systems Information and Communications Technology Supply Chain Security Partnerships and Collaboration Physical Security Risk Management How can we help? Government Educational Institutions Industry State, Local, Tribal, and Territorial Individuals and Families Small and Medium Businesses Find Help Locally Faith-Based Community Executives High-Risk Communities Spotlight Resources &amp; Tools Resources &amp; Tools All Resources &amp; Tools Services Programs Resources Training Groups News &amp; Events News &amp; Events News Events Cybersecurity Alerts &amp; Advisories Request a CISA Speaker Congressional Testimony CISA Conferences CISA Live! Careers Careers Benefits &amp; Perks HireVue Applicant Reasonable Accommodations Process Hiring Resume &amp; Application Tips Students &amp; Recent Graduates Veteran and Military Spouses About About Divisions &amp; Offices Regions Leadership Doing Business with CISA Site Links CISA GitHub CISA Central Contact Us Subscribe Transparency and Accountability Policies &amp; Plans Due to the lapse in federal funding, this website will not be actively managed. &nbsp; Read More no-cost Cyber Services Secure by design&nbsp; Secure Your Business Shields Up Report A Cyber Issue &nbsp; Breadcrumb Home Topics Cyber Threats and Response Share: Cyber Threats and Response CISA tracks and shares information about the latest cybersecurity threats to protect our nation against serious, ever-evolving cyber dangers. Cyber Threats and Response Malware, Phishing, and Ransomware Shields Ready Shields Up Incident Response Information Sharing Securing Networks Nation-State Threats Sophisticated cyber actors and nation-states exploit vulnerabilities to steal information and money and work to develop capabilities to disrupt, destroy, or threaten the delivery of essential services. Defending against these attacks is essential to maintaining the nation’s security. Any cyber-attack, no matter how small, is a threat to our national security and must be identified, managed, and shut down. Protecting cyber space is everyone's responsibility - individuals and families, small and large businesses, SLTT and federal governments. By preventing attacks or mitigating the spread of an attack as quickly as possible, cyber threat actors lose their power. CISA diligently tracks and shares information about the latest cybersecurity risks, attacks, and vulnerabilities, providing our nation with the tools and resources needed to defend against these threats. CISA shares up-to-date information about high-impact types of security activity affecting the community at large and in-depth analysis on new and evolving cyber threats. By staying current on threats and risk factors, CISA helps ensure our nation is protected against serious cyber dangers. Alerts and Advisories Alerts provide timely information about current security issues, vulnerabilities, and exploits. All alerts &amp; advisories Featured Content CISA&#039;s Known Exploited Vulnerabilities Catalog CISA maintains the authoritative source of vulnerabilities that have been exploited in the wild. Organizations should use the KEV catalog as an input to their vulnerability management prioritization framework. How to Use the KEV Catalog Learn how organizations should use the KEV catalog in their vulnerability management prioritization framework. StopRansomware Designed to help public and private organizations defend against the rise in ransomware cases,&nbsp;StopRansomware&nbsp;is a whole-of-government approach that gives one central location for ransomware resources and alerts. News Discover the latest CISA news on Cyber Threat and Advisories. View All News NOVEMBER 12, 2025 | PRESS RELEASE CISA Identifies Ongoing Cyber Threats to Cisco ASA and Firepower Devices OCTOBER 30, 2025 | PRESS RELEASE CISA, NSA and Global Partners Unveil Security Blueprint for Hardening Microsoft Exchange Servers OCTOBER 15, 2025 | PRESS RELEASE CISA Issues Emergency Directive to Address Critical Vulnerabilities in F5 Devices AUGUST 22, 2025 | PRESS RELEASE CISA Issues Draft Software Bill of Materials Guide for Public Comment View All News Helpful Resources Utilize these resources to gain strategies and guidance to protect your cyber space. View All Cyber Threats and Advisories Resources OCTOBER 30, 2025 | PUBLICATION Microsoft Exchange Server Security Best Practices This guide aims to help network defenders harden on-premises Exchange servers against exploitation by malicious actors. View Files SEPTEMBER 10, 2025 | PUBLICATION CISA Strategic Focus: CVE Quality for a Cyber Secure Future This detailed roadmap identifies priorities that will elevate the program to meet the needs of the global cybersecurity community. Download File (PDF, 332.58 KB) SEPTEMBER 03, 2025 | PUBLICATION A Shared Vision of Software Bill of Materials (SBOM) for Cybersecurity SBOMs illuminate the software supply chain, helping ensure that known risks are addressed early and consistently. Download File (PDF, 709.33 KB) JULY 30, 2025 | FACT SHEET Eviction Strategies Tool A Tool for Building Containment and Eviction Playbooks. View All Cyber Threats and Advisories Resources Services Explore the cybersecurity services CISA offers to help mitigate risks, respond to incidents, and prevent threats. View All Services Protective Domain Name System (DNS) Resolver INCREASE YOUR RESILIENCE Contact: cybersharedservices@mail.cisa.dhs.gov CISA&#039;s Protective Domain Name System (DNS) Resolver Service is the evolution and successor to the DNS egress protection capability currently being delivered through E3A DNS Sinkhole. Foundational, Intermediate, Advanced Assessment Evaluation and Standardization Program The Assessment Evaluation and Standardization (AES) program is designed to enable organizations to have a trained individual that can perform several cybersecurity assessments and reviews in accordance with industry and/or federal information security standards. Secure Cloud Business Applications (SCuBA) Project Contact: Cybersharedservices@cisa.dhs.gov The SCuBA project helps agencies adopt necessary security and resilience practices when utilizing cloud services. ScubaGear GitHub ScubaGoggles GitHub Malware Analysis RESPOND TO AN INCIDENT CISA&#039;s Malware Analysis service provides stakeholders a dynamic analysis of malicious code, including recommendations for malware removal and recovery activities. Foundational, Intermediate, Advanced View All Services Contact CISA Central CISA Central is the simplest way for critical infrastructure partners and stakeholders to engage with CISA. Please contact Central@cisa.gov . CISA Central Return to top Topics Spotlight Resources &amp; Tools News &amp; Events Careers About Cybersecurity &amp; Infrastructure Security Agency Facebook X LinkedIn YouTube Instagram RSS CISA Central 1-844-Say-CISA contact@cisa.dhs.gov DHS Seal CISA.gov An official website of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security About CISA Budget and Performance DHS.gov FOIA Requests No FEAR Act Office of Inspector General Privacy Policy Subscribe The White House USA.gov Website Feedback