Social Media: how to use it safely | National Cyber Security Centre icons/chevron/16px/black Skip to main content Please enable JavaScript in your web browser to get the best experience. Home About NCSC Report an incident Contact us Open Search Menu Advice &amp; guidance Back Advice &amp; guidance Our advice &amp; guidance covers a broad range of topics Find information for... You &amp; your family Small &amp; medium sized organisations Large organisations Self employed &amp; sole traders Public sector Cyber security professionals All advice and guidance articles Popular topics Active Cyber Defence Critical National Infrastructure (CNI) Passwords Phishing All topics Other resources Glossary of terms Infographics Verify an NCSC contact Heightened cyber threat information Cyber Governance for Boards Respond to a cyber attack Back Respond to a cyber attack Resources for individuals and organisations in the UK who have experienced an online scam or cyber attack. Affecting you or your family Overview Hacked account Suspicious messages Lost money online Device behaving strangely View more... Affecting your small business Overview Suspicious messages Hacked account Business payment fraud Infected device View more... Affecting your organisation Overview Ransomware attack Brand impersonation Denial of service (DoS) attack Malware View more... Find a product or service Back Find a product or service Find a range of products &amp; services from NCSC and certified 3rd party suppliers In this section Overview Browse cyber security services NCSC assured services Assuring technology Search assured providers Cyber Essentials Useful links Active Cyber Defence services MyNCSC Education &amp; skills Back Education &amp; skills Working with industry, government and academia to support the next generation of researchers, students and cyber security professionals Find information for... Schools Higher education Professional skills training Working with the NCSC Research &amp; academia Education &amp; academia resources CyberFirst CyberSprinters (7-11 year olds) CyberFirst Navigators (11-14 year olds) Training resources for school staff Resources for higher education institutions Cyber Security Body of Knowledge (CyBOK) Industry &amp; skill resources CYBERUK 2026 NCSC for StartUps Industry 100 Cyber League News Back News All the latest information to help you keep track of what&#039;s happening In this section News Blogs Speeches Reports &amp; advisories Malware analysis reports CYBERUK 2026 Stay up to date Subscribe About NCSC Report an incident Contact us Close Search Search Please enter a search term Search Popular Searches CYBERUK 2026 Artificial intelligence Phishing Training Cyber Assessment Framework Guidance Download & print article PDF Download & print article PDF Social Media: how to use it safely Use privacy settings across social media platforms to manage your digital footprint. iStock.com/Kenneth Cheung Social media is a great way to stay in touch with family, friends and keep up to date on the latest news. However, it’s important to know how to manage the security and privacy settings on your&nbsp;accounts,&nbsp;so that your personal information remains inaccessible to anyone but you.&nbsp; This page: collects advice provided by the major social media platforms on how to set up privacy controls&nbsp; suggests some tips on how to use social media safely Advice from social media platforms The following guidance is provided by each of the major social media platforms. Click to read detailed information. Facebook Basic privacy settings and tools&nbsp; X (formerly Twitter) How to protect and unprotect your Tweets YouTube Privacy and safety Instagram Privacy settings and information&nbsp; LinkedIn Account and privacy settings overview&nbsp; Snapchat Privacy settings&nbsp; Tiktok Privacy and security settings&nbsp; Use 2-step verification (2SV) to protect your accounts 2-step verification (often shortened to 2SV and sometimes&nbsp;called two-factor authentication) provides a way of 'double checking' that you really&nbsp; are &nbsp;the person you are claiming to be when you're using online services, such as social media,&nbsp;banking or email. Even if a criminal (or someone simply looking to cause mischief) knows your password, they won't be able to access any of your accounts that are protected using 2SV. The Cyber Aware website contains links on how to set up 2SV across popular online services such as&nbsp; Instagram ,&nbsp; Snapchat ,&nbsp; X &nbsp;and&nbsp; Facebook .&nbsp;&nbsp; For more information on why you should use 2SV wherever you can, read the&nbsp; NCSC's official guidance on 2-step verification . Understanding your digital footprint It's worth exercising some&nbsp;caution&nbsp;when using social media. Not everyone using social media is necessarily who they say they are. Take a moment to check if you&nbsp; know &nbsp;the person, and if the friend/link/follow is genuine.&nbsp; Less obviously, you should think about your digital footprint, a term that describes the information about you that is available online. Criminals can use this to steal your identity, or make phishing messages more convincing. You should: Think about&nbsp; what &nbsp;you're posting, and&nbsp; who &nbsp;has access to it. Have you configured the privacy options so that it's only accessible to the people you want to see it? Consider what your followers and friends&nbsp; need &nbsp;to know, and what detail is unnecessary (but could be useful for criminals). Have an idea about what your friends, colleagues or other contacts say about&nbsp; you&nbsp; online. Although aimed at businesses, NPSA's Digital Footprint Campaign , contains a range of useful materials (including posters and booklets) to help understand the impact of your digital footprint. Spotting and reporting fake accounts Scammers will make fake accounts and/or hack real accounts to use them to commit a range of fraudulent activities. Many sites have a process to verify accounts, such as verified badges for Instagram and Facebook. This can help to identify real accounts against fake accounts pretending to be a well-known person. Other things to look out for include where an account has a date indicating when it was set up nonsensical names (appears to be random letters and numbers) the number of followers (although note that followers can be bought) It is not just celebrities accounts that are targeted by scammers. If a family member or friend posts something that appears suspicious or out of character, contact them by another method (in case their account has been hacked). If it transpires their account has been taken over, they should follow the NCSC's guidance on recovering hacked accounts . You can also report fake posts or accounts directly with the provider. Report a fake Facebook profile or page Report a post or profile on Instagram Report impersonation accounts on X. Report someone on TikTok Report fake LinkedIn profiles Report a Safety Concern on Snapchat Reporting YouTube videos and channels Social media and children Most social media accounts require users to be at least 13 years old.&nbsp;However ,&nbsp; it is easy&nbsp;to sign-up with a false date of birth.&nbsp;For expert advice about how to keep children safe online, please&nbsp;refer to: Thinkuknow: National Crime Agency:&nbsp; education programme for children Internet Matters.Org : Social Media Tips NSPCC :&nbsp;keep your child safe on social networks Topics Authentication Social media Share and print this article Download & print article PDF Download & print article PDF Share Share Close share options Share on Facebook Share on LinkedIn Share on X Copy Link Published Publish date 24 January 2019 Reviewed 5 September 2022 Version 1.0 Written for Written for You &amp; your family Was this article helpful? Yes the article was helpful No the article was not helpful Close Feedback Form Back to top Share Close share options Share on Facebook Share on LinkedIn Share on X Copy Link Also see Information Publish date 23 Apr 2026 Passkeys: what you need to know The NCSC recommends users opt for passkeys over passwords wherever they are available News Publish date 23 Apr 2026 NCSC: Leave passwords in the past - passkeys are the future Passkeys are the more secure and user-friendly login method and should be the default authentication option for consumers. Blog Post Publish date 23 Apr 2026 Passkeys are more secure than traditional ways to log in Passkeys offer a more usable, secure replacement for passwords and are already supported by most modern devices. Home Follow us X LinkedIn Instagram Threads RSS About this website Privacy notice Cookies Accessibility Terms &amp; conditions Social media policy Contact the NCSC Report an incident Report suspicious messages or websites Verify an NCSC contact Report a vulnerability Contact the press office Can&#039;t find what you&#039;re looking for? Useful links GCHQ MI5 SIS NPSA GOV.UK