Phishing: Spot and report scam emails, texts, websites and calls | National Cyber Security Centre icons/chevron/16px/black Skip to main content Please enable JavaScript in your web browser to get the best experience. Home About NCSC Report an incident Contact us Open Search Menu Advice &amp; guidance Back Advice &amp; guidance Our advice &amp; guidance covers a broad range of topics Find information for... You &amp; your family Small &amp; medium sized organisations Large organisations Self employed &amp; sole traders Public sector Cyber security professionals All advice and guidance articles Popular topics Active Cyber Defence Critical National Infrastructure (CNI) Passwords Phishing All topics Other resources Glossary of terms Infographics Verify an NCSC contact Heightened cyber threat information Cyber Governance for Boards Respond to a cyber attack Back Respond to a cyber attack Resources for individuals and organisations in the UK who have experienced an online scam or cyber attack. Affecting you or your family Overview Hacked account Suspicious messages Lost money online Device behaving strangely View more... Affecting your small business Overview Suspicious messages Hacked account Business payment fraud Infected device View more... Affecting your organisation Overview Ransomware attack Brand impersonation Denial of service (DoS) attack Malware View more... Find a product or service Back Find a product or service Find a range of products &amp; services from NCSC and certified 3rd party suppliers In this section Overview Browse cyber security services NCSC assured services Assuring technology Search assured providers Cyber Essentials Useful links Active Cyber Defence services MyNCSC Education &amp; skills Back Education &amp; skills Working with industry, government and academia to support the next generation of researchers, students and cyber security professionals Find information for... Schools Higher education Professional skills training Working with the NCSC Research &amp; academia Education &amp; academia resources CyberFirst CyberSprinters (7-11 year olds) CyberFirst Navigators (11-14 year olds) Training resources for school staff Resources for higher education institutions Cyber Security Body of Knowledge (CyBOK) Industry &amp; skill resources CYBERUK 2026 NCSC for StartUps Industry 100 Cyber League News Back News All the latest information to help you keep track of what&#039;s happening In this section News Blogs Speeches Reports &amp; advisories Malware analysis reports CYBERUK 2026 Stay up to date Subscribe About NCSC Report an incident Contact us Close Search Search Please enter a search term Search Popular Searches CYBERUK 2026 Artificial intelligence Phishing Training Cyber Assessment Framework Guidance Phishing: Spot and report scam emails, texts, websites and calls How to recognise and report emails, texts, websites, adverts or phone calls that you think are trying to scam you. Pages Phishing: Spot and report scam emails, texts, websites and calls Report a scam email Report a scam text Report a scam phone call Report a scam website Report a scam advert Phishing scams: If you&#039;ve shared sensitive information How to spot a scam email, text message or call Page 1 of 8 iStockphoto.com/danijelala What is phishing? 'Phishing' is when criminals use scam emails, text messages or phone calls to trick their victims. The aim is often to make you visit a website, which may download a virus onto your computer, or steal bank details or other personal information. This page explains how to report phishing attempts, and protect yourself from scammers. Why you should report phishing scams The National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) is a UK government organisation that has the power to investigate and take down scam email addresses and websites. Reporting a scam is free and only takes a minute . By reporting phishing attempts, you can: reduce the amount of scam communications you receive make yourself a harder target for scammers protect others from cyber crime online &nbsp; As of March 2026 the number of reports received stands at more than: 53 m reported scams Which has resulted in: &nbsp; 245 k scams being removed across 436,000 URLs What to do next Report a scam email How to report suspicious emails, and what to do if you think you’ve responded to a scam email. Report a scam text message How to report suspicious text messages, and what to do if you think you’ve responded to a scam text. Report a scam phone call How to report a suspicious phone call, and what to do if you think you have been the victim of a phone scam. Report a scam website How to report a suspicious website, and what to do if you think you’ve shared personal information. Report a scam&nbsp;advert How to report an online advert that you suspect is trying to scam you. Phishing scams: What to do if you’ve shared personal information What to do if you’ve shared personal information with someone you think might be a scammer. How to spot a scam email, text message or call Recognise the signs someone is trying to scam you, and learn how to check if a message you have received is genuine. Make yourself a harder target Criminals use information about you that’s available online (including on social media sites) to make their phishing messages more convincing. You can reduce the likelihood of being phished by thinking about what personal information you (and others) post about you, and by&nbsp; reviewing your privacy settings within your social media accounts . Next page: Report a scam email Topics Phishing Published Publish date 26 November 2021 Reviewed 5 September 2022 Version 2.0 Written for Written for You &amp; your family Share and print this article Share Share Close share options Share on Facebook Share on LinkedIn Share on X Copy Link Was this article helpful? Yes the article was helpful No the article was not helpful Close Feedback Form Back to top Share Close share options Share on Facebook Share on LinkedIn Share on X Copy Link Also see News Publish date 19 Jul 2024 Statement on major IT outage Following the global IT outage on Friday 19 July, affected organisations should put in place vendor mitigations. The NCSC is also warning about an increase in related phishing. Blog Post Publish date 11 Mar 2024 Check your email security, and protect your customers Free online tool from the NCSC prevents cyber criminals using your email to conduct cyber attacks. Blog Post Publish date 8 Feb 2024 QR Codes - what&#039;s the real risk? How safe is it to scan that QR code in the pub? Or in that email? Home Follow us X LinkedIn Instagram Threads RSS About this website Privacy notice Cookies Accessibility Terms &amp; conditions Social media policy Contact the NCSC Report an incident Report suspicious messages or websites Verify an NCSC contact Report a vulnerability Contact the press office Can&#039;t find what you&#039;re looking for? Useful links GCHQ MI5 SIS NPSA GOV.UK