Grammar Introduction - Purdue OWL® - Purdue University Skip to main content College of Liberal Arts Purdue OWL® Menu Home On-Campus Online Research Writing General Writing Overview Writing Style The Writing Process Academic Writing Common Writing Assignments Mechanics Grammar Punctuation Visual Rhetoric Undergraduate Applications Graduate School Applications Personal Correspondence Community Engaged Writing Media File Index Graduate Writing Overview Introduction to Graduate Writing Graduate Writing Topics Graduate Writing Genres Thesis and Dissertation Subject-Specific Writing Overview Professional, Technical Writing Writing in Literature Writing in the Social Sciences Writing in Engineering Creative Writing Healthcare Writing Journalism and Journalistic Writing Writing in the Purdue SURF Program Writing in Art History Job Search Writing Overview Preparing an Application Job Search Letters Résumés and CVs Video Résumés Skilled Labor Job Search Resources Multilingual Overview Multilingual Instructors and Tutors Multilingual Students World Englishes Research and Citation Overview Conducting Research Using Research APA Style (7th Edition) MLA Style Chicago Style IEEE Style AMA Style ASA Style APA Style (6th Edition) Exercises Home Grammar Punctuation Spelling Sentence Structure Sentence Style Writing Numbers Multilingual Avoiding Plagiarism Teacher/Tutor Resources Overview Writing Instructors Writing Letters of Recommendation for Students Writing Tutors Teaching Resources OWL Exercises Preventing Plagiarism Translingual Writing Writing in the Engineering Classroom Ad-Free Presentation Mode Giving Grammar Spelling: Common Words that Sound Alike Writing Numbers Adjective or Adverb The Difference between Adjectives and Adverbs Avoiding Common Errors How to Use Adjectives and Adverbs Adjectives with Countable and Uncountable Nouns Adjective or Adverb? Appositives Articles: A versus An Using Articles Prepositions Prepositions for Time, Place, and Introducing Objects Prepositions of Direction: To, On (to), In (to) Prepositions of Location: At, In, On Prepositions of Spatial Relationship Pronouns Using Pronouns Clearly Pronoun Case Reflexive Pronouns Gendered Pronouns &amp; Singular &#8220;They&#8221; Relative Pronouns Introduction and General Usage in Defining Clauses Relative Pronouns in Non-defining Clauses Defining vs. Non-Defining and ESL Tips Count and Noncount Nouns Count and Noncount Nouns: Basic Rules Count and Noncount Nouns (with Plurals, Articles, and Quantity Words) Count and Noncount Nouns (with Articles and Adjectives) Making Subjects and Verbs Agree Verb Tenses Introduction to Verb Tenses Passive Verbs Active Verb Tenses Verb Tense Consistency Verbs with Helpers Active Verb Tenses Irregular Verbs Irregular Verbs: Overview and List Commonly Confused Verbs That vs. Which Suggested Resources Style Guide Overview MLA Guide APA Guide Chicago Guide OWL Exercises Purdue OWL General Writing Grammar Grammar Grammar Welcome to the Purdue OWL This page is brought to you by the OWL at Purdue University. When printing this page, you must include the entire legal notice. Copyright &#169;1995-2018 by The Writing Lab &amp; The OWL at Purdue and Purdue University. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, reproduced, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed without permission. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our terms and conditions of fair use. These OWL resources will help you use correct grammar in your writing. This area includes resources on grammar topics, such as count and noncount nouns, articles (a versus an), subject-verb agreement, and prepositions. Grammar-related exercises can be found here . In this section Spelling: Common Words that Sound Alike This resource covers common spelling errors including accept/except, ei/ie, noun plurals, and &#8211;ible/able. Writing Numbers This section discusses numbers, how to write them correctly, and when to use numerical expressions instead. Appositives This handout defines appositives and explains how they are used. Articles: A versus An This short handout deals with which article to use before a noun -- "a" or "an." Using Articles This handout discusses the differences between indefinite articles (a/an) and definite articles (the). Making Subjects and Verbs Agree Ever get "subject/verb agreement" as an error on a paper? This handout will help you understand this common grammar problem. Active Verb Tenses This handout gives some examples of the different tenses verbs can have. That vs. Which Subsections Adjective or Adverb This worksheet discusses the differences between adjectives and adverbs. It defines adjectives and adverbs, shows what each can do, and offers several examples of each in use. Click here for some examples. How to Use Adjectives and Adverbs This resource provides basic guidelines of adjective and adverb use. Prepositions This section deals with prepositions and their standard uses. Pronouns This section has information about how to use pronouns correctly. Relative Pronouns This handout provides detailed rules and examples for the usage of relative pronouns (that, who, whom, whose, which, where, when, and why). Count and Noncount Nouns This handout discusses the differences between count nouns and noncount nouns. Count nouns can be pluralized; noncount nouns cannot. Verb Tenses This handout explains and describes the sequence of verb tenses in English. Irregular Verbs This handout contains a list and discussion of common irregular verbs. Resources Purdue Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Campus Map Careers Directory Faculty and Staff Human Resources University Event Calendar College of Liberal Arts Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> CLA Administration CLA Business Office CLA Directory CLA Marketing &amp; Communication Faculty &amp; Staff Resources Purdue OWL Staff/Student Applications Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> BoilerConnect Brightspace myPurdue OneCampus Portal Office 365 Outlook Facebook Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Twitter Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> YouTube Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Instagram Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> LinkedIn Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Purdue OWL is a registered trademark. Copyright &#169;2026 by The On-Campus Writing Lab &#160;&amp; The OWL at Purdue &#160;and Purdue University . This material may not be published, reproduced, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed without permission. This website collects and publishes the ideas of individuals who have contributed those ideas in their capacities as faculty-mentored student scholars. The materials collected here do not express the views of, or positions held by, Purdue University. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our terms and conditions of fair use . Privacy policy .