Mechanics Introduction - Purdue OWL® - Purdue University Skip to main content College of Liberal Arts Purdue OWL® Menu Home On-Campus Online Research Writing General Writing Overview Writing Style The Writing Process Academic Writing Common Writing Assignments Mechanics Grammar Punctuation Visual Rhetoric Undergraduate Applications Graduate School Applications Personal Correspondence Community Engaged Writing Media File Index Graduate Writing Overview Introduction to Graduate Writing Graduate Writing Topics Graduate Writing Genres Thesis and Dissertation Subject-Specific Writing Overview Professional, Technical Writing Writing in Literature Writing in the Social Sciences Writing in Engineering Creative Writing Healthcare Writing Journalism and Journalistic Writing Writing in the Purdue SURF Program Writing in Art History Job Search Writing Overview Preparing an Application Job Search Letters Résumés and CVs Video Résumés Skilled Labor Job Search Resources Multilingual Overview Multilingual Instructors and Tutors Multilingual Students World Englishes Research and Citation Overview Conducting Research Using Research APA Style (7th Edition) MLA Style Chicago Style IEEE Style AMA Style ASA Style APA Style (6th Edition) Exercises Home Grammar Punctuation Spelling Sentence Structure Sentence Style Writing Numbers Multilingual Avoiding Plagiarism Teacher/Tutor Resources Overview Writing Instructors Writing Letters of Recommendation for Students Writing Tutors Teaching Resources OWL Exercises Preventing Plagiarism Translingual Writing Writing in the Engineering Classroom Ad-Free Presentation Mode Giving Mechanics Higher Order Concerns (HOCs) and Lower Order Concerns (LOCs) Improving Sentence Clarity Parts of Speech Overview Sentence Clarity Presentation Sentence Fragments Transitions and Transitional Devices Writing Transitions Transitional Devices Dangling Modifiers and How To Correct Them Parallel Structure Two-Part (Phrasal) Verbs (Idioms) Overview of Two-Part (Phrasal) Verbs (Idioms) Separable Phrasal Verbs Inseparable Phrasal Verbs Intransitive Phrasal Verbs A Little Help with Capitals Gerunds, Participles, and Infinitives Gerunds Participles Infinitives Comparing Gerunds, Participles, and Infinitives Suggested Resources Style Guide Overview MLA Guide APA Guide Chicago Guide OWL Exercises Purdue OWL General Writing Mechanics Mechanics Mechanics Welcome to the Purdue OWL This page is brought to you by the OWL at Purdue University. When printing this page, you must include the entire legal notice. Copyright &#169;1995-2018 by The Writing Lab &amp; The OWL at Purdue and Purdue University. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, reproduced, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed without permission. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our terms and conditions of fair use. These OWL resources will help you with sentence level organization and style. This area includes resources on writing issues, such as active and passive voice, parallel sentence structure, parts of speech, and transitions. Exercises relating to spelling can be found here . Exercises relating to numbering can be found here . Exercises relating to sentence structure can be found here . Exercises relating to sentence style can be found here . In this section Higher Order Concerns (HOCs) and Lower Order Concerns (LOCs) This handout discusses the common Higher Order Concerns (HOCs) and Lower Order Concerns (LOCs) in writing. Improving Sentence Clarity If you're having sentence clarity problems in your papers, this handout might be just what you need. Parts of Speech Overview This handout defines the basic parts of speech and provides examples of their uses in sentences. Links to more handouts and exercises on particular parts of speech are also provided. If you are learning English as a Second Language (ESL), you may also want to browse through a complete listing of our ESL resources. Sentence Clarity Presentation Sentence Fragments This handout provides an overview and examples of sentence fragments. Dangling Modifiers and How To Correct Them This resource explains what a dangling modifier is and how to correct the problem. Contributors: Chris Berry, Karl Stolley Last Edited: 2013-01-07 12:05:23 Parallel Structure This handout describes and provides examples of parallel structure (similar patterns of words). A Little Help with Capitals This resource details standard capitalization rules. Subsections Transitions and Transitional Devices A discussion of transition strategies and specific transitional devices. Two-Part (Phrasal) Verbs (Idioms) Provides an overview and lists of phrasal/two part verbs. Gerunds, Participles, and Infinitives This handout provides a detailed overview (including descriptions and examples) of gerunds, participles, and infinitives. Resources Purdue Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Campus Map Careers Directory Faculty and Staff Human Resources University Event Calendar College of Liberal Arts Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> CLA Administration CLA Business Office CLA Directory CLA Marketing &amp; Communication Faculty &amp; Staff Resources Purdue OWL Staff/Student Applications Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> BoilerConnect Brightspace myPurdue OneCampus Portal Office 365 Outlook Facebook Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Twitter Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> YouTube Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Instagram Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> LinkedIn Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Purdue OWL is a registered trademark. Copyright &#169;2026 by The On-Campus Writing Lab &#160;&amp; The OWL at Purdue &#160;and Purdue University . This material may not be published, reproduced, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed without permission. This website collects and publishes the ideas of individuals who have contributed those ideas in their capacities as faculty-mentored student scholars. The materials collected here do not express the views of, or positions held by, Purdue University. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our terms and conditions of fair use . Privacy policy .