Punctuation Introduction - Purdue OWL® - Purdue University Skip to main content College of Liberal Arts Purdue OWL® Menu Home On-Campus Online Research Writing General Writing Overview Writing Style The Writing Process Academic Writing Common Writing Assignments Mechanics Grammar Punctuation Visual Rhetoric Undergraduate Applications Graduate School Applications Personal Correspondence Community Engaged Writing Media File Index Graduate Writing Overview Introduction to Graduate Writing Graduate Writing Topics Graduate Writing Genres Thesis and Dissertation Subject-Specific Writing Overview Professional, Technical Writing Writing in Literature Writing in the Social Sciences Writing in Engineering Creative Writing Healthcare Writing Journalism and Journalistic Writing Writing in the Purdue SURF Program Writing in Art History Job Search Writing Overview Preparing an Application Job Search Letters Résumés and CVs Video Résumés Skilled Labor Job Search Resources Multilingual Overview Multilingual Instructors and Tutors Multilingual Students World Englishes Research and Citation Overview Conducting Research Using Research APA Style (7th Edition) MLA Style Chicago Style IEEE Style AMA Style ASA Style APA Style (6th Edition) Exercises Home Grammar Punctuation Spelling Sentence Structure Sentence Style Writing Numbers Multilingual Avoiding Plagiarism Teacher/Tutor Resources Overview Writing Instructors Writing Letters of Recommendation for Students Writing Tutors Teaching Resources OWL Exercises Preventing Plagiarism Translingual Writing Writing in the Engineering Classroom Ad-Free Presentation Mode Giving Punctuation Punctuation Brief Overview of Punctuation Punctuation in Types of Sentences Sentence Punctuation Patterns Independent and Dependent Clauses Identifying Independent and Dependent Clauses Run-ons - Comma Splices - Fused Sentences Conquering the Comma PowerPoint Presentation Commas Commas: Quick Rules Extended Rules for Using Commas Commas After Introductions Commas vs. Semicolons in Compound Sentences Commas with Nonessential Elements The Apostrophe Hyphen Use Quotation Marks How to Use Quotation Marks Extended Rules for Using Quotation Marks Additional Punctuation Rules When Using Quotation Marks Quotation Marks with Fiction, Poetry, and Titles Quotation Mark Exercise and Answers Suggested Resources Style Guide Overview MLA Guide APA Guide Chicago Guide OWL Exercises Purdue OWL General Writing Punctuation Punctuation Punctuation Welcome to the Purdue OWL This page is brought to you by the OWL at Purdue University. When printing this page, you must include the entire legal notice. Copyright &#169;1995-2018 by The Writing Lab &amp; The OWL at Purdue and Purdue University. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, reproduced, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed without permission. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our terms and conditions of fair use. These OWL resources will help you with punctuation, such as using commas, quotation marks, apostrophes, and hyphens. In this section Sentence Punctuation Patterns This handout describes eight sentence punctuation patterns with examples. Conquering the Comma PowerPoint Presentation The Apostrophe This handout provides rules and examples for apostrophe usage. Hyphen Use A comprehensive rundown on the proper use of the hyphen. Subsections Punctuation When speaking, we can pause or change the tone of our voices to indicate emphasis. When writing, we must use punctuation to indicate these places of emphasis. This resource should help to clarify when and how to use various marks of punctuation. Independent and Dependent Clauses This handout defines dependent and independent clauses and explores how they are treated in standard usage. Commas This resource offers a number of pages about comma use. Quotation Marks A rundown of the general rules of when and where to use quotation marks. Resources Purdue Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Campus Map Careers Directory Faculty and Staff Human Resources University Event Calendar College of Liberal Arts Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> CLA Administration CLA Business Office CLA Directory CLA Marketing &amp; Communication Faculty &amp; Staff Resources Purdue OWL Staff/Student Applications Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> BoilerConnect Brightspace myPurdue OneCampus Portal Office 365 Outlook Facebook Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Twitter Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> YouTube Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Instagram Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> LinkedIn Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Purdue OWL is a registered trademark. Copyright &#169;2026 by The On-Campus Writing Lab &#160;&amp; The OWL at Purdue &#160;and Purdue University . This material may not be published, reproduced, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed without permission. This website collects and publishes the ideas of individuals who have contributed those ideas in their capacities as faculty-mentored student scholars. The materials collected here do not express the views of, or positions held by, Purdue University. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our terms and conditions of fair use . Privacy policy .