Welcome to the Purdue OWL - Purdue OWL® - Purdue University Skip to main content College of Liberal Arts Purdue OWL® Menu Home On-Campus Online Research Writing General Writing Overview Writing Style The Writing Process Academic Writing Common Writing Assignments Mechanics Grammar Punctuation Visual Rhetoric Undergraduate Applications Graduate School Applications Personal Correspondence Community Engaged Writing Media File Index Graduate Writing Overview Introduction to Graduate Writing Graduate Writing Topics Graduate Writing Genres Thesis and Dissertation Subject-Specific Writing Overview Professional, Technical Writing Writing in Literature Writing in the Social Sciences Writing in Engineering Creative Writing Healthcare Writing Journalism and Journalistic Writing Writing in the Purdue SURF Program Writing in Art History Job Search Writing Overview Preparing an Application Job Search Letters Résumés and CVs Video Résumés Skilled Labor Job Search Resources Multilingual Overview Multilingual Instructors and Tutors Multilingual Students World Englishes Research and Citation Overview Conducting Research Using Research APA Style (7th Edition) MLA Style Chicago Style IEEE Style AMA Style ASA Style APA Style (6th Edition) Exercises Home Grammar Punctuation Spelling Sentence Structure Sentence Style Writing Numbers Multilingual Avoiding Plagiarism Teacher/Tutor Resources Overview Writing Instructors Writing Letters of Recommendation for Students Writing Tutors Teaching Resources OWL Exercises Preventing Plagiarism Translingual Writing Writing in the Engineering Classroom Ad-Free Presentation Mode Giving Purdue OWL General Writing General Writing Resources Writing Style The Writing Process Academic Writing Common Writing Assignments Mechanics Grammar Punctuation Visual Rhetoric Undergraduate Applications Graduate School Applications Personal Correspondence Media File Index General Writing FAQs Research and Citation Research and Citation Resources Conducting Research Using Research MLA Style Chicago Style IEEE Style AMA Style ASA Style APA Style (7th Edition) Using Citation Generators Responsibly Using Paper Checkers Responsibly Style Manual Glossary Research and Citation Avoiding Plagiarism Plagiarism Overview&#160; Style Guide Overview Frequently Asked Questions Regarding Plagiarism Common Knowledge &amp; Attribution Best Practices to Avoid Plagiarism&#160; Safe Practices: An Exercise Best Practices for Teachers "Should I Cite This?" Poster Common Knowledge &amp; Attribution Resources Community Engaged Writing Writing Instructors Writing Letters of Recommendation for Students Writing Tutors Teaching Resources Preventing Plagiarism Translingual Writing OWL Presentation Mode Teacher and Tutor Resources Graduate Writing Graduate Writing What is Writing? Introduction to Graduate Writing Graduate Writing Topics Graduate Writing Genres Thesis &amp; Dissertation Subject-Specific Writing Creative Writing Healthcare Writing Journalism and Journalistic Writing Professional, Technical Writing Writing in Literature Writing in the Social Sciences Writing in Engineering Writing in the Purdue SURF Program Writing in Art History Subject-Specific Writing Job Search Writing Preparing an Application Job Search Letters Résumés and CVs Video Résumés Skilled Labor Job Search Resources Job Search Writing Multilingual English as a Second Language World Englishes Multilingual Instructors, Tutors ESL Students About the OWL OWL Information Giving to the Purdue OWL Suggested Resources Style Guide Overview MLA Guide APA Guide Chicago Guide OWL Exercises Purdue OWL Welcome to the Purdue OWL Welcome to the Purdue OWL Welcome to the Purdue OWL This page is brought to you by the OWL at Purdue University. When printing this page, you must include the entire legal notice. Copyright &#169;1995-2018 by The Writing Lab &amp; The OWL at Purdue and Purdue University. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, reproduced, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed without permission. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our terms and conditions of fair use. The Purdue OWL houses writing resources and instructional material, and we provide these as a free service at Purdue. Students, members of the community, and users worldwide will find information to assist with many writing projects. Teachers and trainers may use this material for in-class and out-of-class instruction. Mission The On-Campus and Online versions of Purdue OWL assist clients in their development as writers&#8212;no matter what their skill level&#8212;with on-campus consultations, online participation, and community engagement. The Purdue OWL serves the Purdue West Lafayette and Indianapolis campuses and coordinates with local literacy initiatives. The Purdue OWL offers global support through online reference materials and services. A Message about Our Content Development The Purdue OWL offers you open access resources to accompany and support you in the completion of your writing projects. Whether you write for academic, professional, or creative purposes, the design team hopes that you find the resources to meet your writing needs or address your concerns. This website hosts a wide range of writing materials addressing topics from statements of purpose to citation styles to aspects of grammar . The Purdue OWL team is committed to user experience, accessibility, accuracy, and relevance. We are constantly looking for better ways to design the materials, to keep them updated, and to make them fit today's academic and professional writing demands and technologies. Please feel free to us through our contact page if you have any questions, comments, or suggestions. We are happy to support you as much as we are glad to know your ideas to improve the website and the resources that we offer writers. Resources Purdue Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Campus Map Careers Directory Faculty and Staff Human Resources University Event Calendar College of Liberal Arts Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> CLA Administration CLA Business Office CLA Directory CLA Marketing &amp; Communication Faculty &amp; Staff Resources Purdue OWL Staff/Student Applications Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> BoilerConnect Brightspace myPurdue OneCampus Portal Office 365 Outlook Facebook Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Twitter Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> YouTube Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Instagram Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> LinkedIn Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Purdue OWL is a registered trademark. Copyright &#169;2026 by The On-Campus Writing Lab &#160;&amp; The OWL at Purdue &#160;and Purdue University . This material may not be published, reproduced, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed without permission. This website collects and publishes the ideas of individuals who have contributed those ideas in their capacities as faculty-mentored student scholars. The materials collected here do not express the views of, or positions held by, Purdue University. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our terms and conditions of fair use . Privacy policy .