The Writing Process Introduction - Purdue OWL® - Purdue University Skip to main content College of Liberal Arts Purdue OWL® Menu Home On-Campus Online Research Writing General Writing Overview Writing Style The Writing Process Academic Writing Common Writing Assignments Mechanics Grammar Punctuation Visual Rhetoric Undergraduate Applications Graduate School Applications Personal Correspondence Community Engaged Writing Media File Index Graduate Writing Overview Introduction to Graduate Writing Graduate Writing Topics Graduate Writing Genres Thesis and Dissertation Subject-Specific Writing Overview Professional, Technical Writing Writing in Literature Writing in the Social Sciences Writing in Engineering Creative Writing Healthcare Writing Journalism and Journalistic Writing Writing in the Purdue SURF Program Writing in Art History Job Search Writing Overview Preparing an Application Job Search Letters Résumés and CVs Video Résumés Skilled Labor Job Search Resources Multilingual Overview Multilingual Instructors and Tutors Multilingual Students World Englishes Research and Citation Overview Conducting Research Using Research APA Style (7th Edition) MLA Style Chicago Style IEEE Style AMA Style ASA Style APA Style (6th Edition) Exercises Home Grammar Punctuation Spelling Sentence Structure Sentence Style Writing Numbers Multilingual Avoiding Plagiarism Teacher/Tutor Resources Overview Writing Instructors Writing Letters of Recommendation for Students Writing Tutors Teaching Resources OWL Exercises Preventing Plagiarism Translingual Writing Writing in the Engineering Classroom Ad-Free Presentation Mode Giving The Writing Process Writing Task OWL Resource List Invention: Starting the Writing Process Prewriting (Invention) Introduction to Prewriting (Invention) Prewriting (Invention) General Questions More Prewriting (Invention) Questions Organization &amp; the CARS Model Writer's Block Symptoms and Cures for Writer's Block Other Strategies for Getting Over Writer's Block Stasis Theory Stasis Theory Stasis Theory for Research Stasis Theory for Teamwork Tips and Examples for Writing Thesis Statements Developing an Outline Four Main Components for Effective Outlines Why and How to Create a Useful Outline Types of Outlines and Samples Reverse Outlining: An Exercise for Taking Notes and Revising Your Work Proofreading Where Do I Begin? Finding Common Errors Suggestions for Proofreading Your Paper Revising for Cohesion Steps for Revising Your Paper Time Management: Conquering Long Assignments Writing with Feedback Writing with Feedback Resource Overview Giving Feedback for Peer Review Instructor's Guide for Giving Feedback Interpreting Instructor Feedback Writing with Feedback on a Manuscript Feedback Suggested Resources Style Guide Overview MLA Guide APA Guide Chicago Guide OWL Exercises Purdue OWL General Writing The Writing Process The Writing Process The Writing Process Welcome to the Purdue OWL This page is brought to you by the OWL at Purdue University. When printing this page, you must include the entire legal notice. Copyright &#169;1995-2018 by The Writing Lab &amp; The OWL at Purdue and Purdue University. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, reproduced, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed without permission. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our terms and conditions of fair use. These OWL resources will help you with the writing process: pre-writing (invention), developing research questions and outlines, composing thesis statements, and proofreading. While the writing process may be different for each person and for each particular assignment, the resources contained in this section follow the general work flow of pre-writing, organizing, and revising. For resources and examples on specific types of writing assignments, please go to our Common Writing Assignments area. In this section Writing Task OWL Resource List This resource will help you find OWL material for the many different kinds of writing tasks you may face in school and in the workplace. Invention: Starting the Writing Process Tips for how to start a writing assignment. Organization &amp; the CARS Model Tips and Examples for Writing Thesis Statements This resource provides tips for creating a thesis statement and examples of different types of thesis statements. Reverse Outlining: An Exercise for Taking Notes and Revising Your Work This exercise is useful for either difficult texts that you must read, or as a way to revise your work for organization and clarity. Time Management: Conquering Long Assignments Subsections Prewriting (Invention) This section explains the prewriting (invention) stage of the composing process. It includes processes, strategies, and questions to help you begin to write. Writer's Block A description of common causes of writer&#8217;s block and advice for overcoming these blocks. Written by Kylie Regan. Stasis Theory This resource provides an overview of stasis theory and what you can do with it to help you conduct research, compose documents, and work in teams. Developing an Outline This resource describes why outlines are useful, what types of outlines exist, suggestions for developing effective outlines, and how outlines can be used as an invention strategy for writing. Proofreading Proofreading is primarily about searching your writing for errors, both grammatical and typographical, before submitting your paper for an audience (a teacher, a publisher, etc.). Use this resource to help you find and fix common errors. Writing with Feedback Resources Purdue Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Campus Map Careers Directory Faculty and Staff Human Resources University Event Calendar College of Liberal Arts Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> CLA Administration CLA Business Office CLA Directory CLA Marketing &amp; Communication Faculty &amp; Staff Resources Purdue OWL Staff/Student Applications Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> BoilerConnect Brightspace myPurdue OneCampus Portal Office 365 Outlook Facebook Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Twitter Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> YouTube Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Instagram Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> LinkedIn Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Purdue OWL is a registered trademark. Copyright &#169;2026 by The On-Campus Writing Lab &#160;&amp; The OWL at Purdue &#160;and Purdue University . This material may not be published, reproduced, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed without permission. This website collects and publishes the ideas of individuals who have contributed those ideas in their capacities as faculty-mentored student scholars. The materials collected here do not express the views of, or positions held by, Purdue University. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our terms and conditions of fair use . Privacy policy .