Narrative Essays - Purdue OWL® - Purdue University Skip to main content College of Liberal Arts Purdue OWL® Menu Home On-Campus Online Research Writing General Writing Overview Writing Style The Writing Process Academic Writing Common Writing Assignments Mechanics Grammar Punctuation Visual Rhetoric Undergraduate Applications Graduate School Applications Personal Correspondence Community Engaged Writing Media File Index Graduate Writing Overview Introduction to Graduate Writing Graduate Writing Topics Graduate Writing Genres Thesis and Dissertation Subject-Specific Writing Overview Professional, Technical Writing Writing in Literature Writing in the Social Sciences Writing in Engineering Creative Writing Healthcare Writing Journalism and Journalistic Writing Writing in the Purdue SURF Program Writing in Art History Job Search Writing Overview Preparing an Application Job Search Letters Résumés and CVs Video Résumés Skilled Labor Job Search Resources Multilingual Overview Multilingual Instructors and Tutors Multilingual Students World Englishes Research and Citation Overview Conducting Research Using Research APA Style (7th Edition) MLA Style Chicago Style IEEE Style AMA Style ASA Style APA Style (6th Edition) Exercises Home Grammar Punctuation Spelling Sentence Structure Sentence Style Writing Numbers Multilingual Avoiding Plagiarism Teacher/Tutor Resources Overview Writing Instructors Writing Letters of Recommendation for Students Writing Tutors Teaching Resources OWL Exercises Preventing Plagiarism Translingual Writing Writing in the Engineering Classroom Ad-Free Presentation Mode Giving Essay Writing Expository Essays Descriptive Essays Narrative Essays Argumentative Essays Suggested Resources Style Guide Overview MLA Guide APA Guide Chicago Guide OWL Exercises Purdue OWL General Writing Academic Writing Essay Writing Narrative Essays Narrative Essays Welcome to the Purdue OWL This page is brought to you by the OWL at Purdue University. When printing this page, you must include the entire legal notice. Copyright &#169;1995-2018 by The Writing Lab &amp; The OWL at Purdue and Purdue University. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, reproduced, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed without permission. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our terms and conditions of fair use. What is a narrative essay? When writing a narrative essay, one might think of it as telling a story. These essays are often anecdotal, experiential, and personal&#8212;allowing students to express themselves in a creative and, quite often, moving ways. Here are some guidelines for writing a narrative essay. If written as a story, the essay should include all the parts of a story. This means that you must include an introduction, plot, characters, setting, climax, and conclusion. When would a narrative essay not be written as a story? A good example of this is when an instructor asks a student to write a book report. Obviously, this would not necessarily follow the pattern of a story and would focus on providing an informative narrative for the reader. The essay should have a purpose. Make a point! Think of this as the thesis of your story. If there is no point to what you are narrating, why narrate it at all? The essay should be written from a clear point of view. It is quite common for narrative essays to be written from the standpoint of the author; however, this is not the sole perspective to be considered. Creativity in narrative essays oftentimes manifests itself in the form of authorial perspective. Use clear and concise language throughout the essay. Much like the descriptive essay, narrative essays are effective when the language is carefully, particularly, and artfully chosen. Use specific language to evoke specific emotions and senses in the reader. The use of the first person pronoun &#8216;I&#8217; is welcomed. Do not abuse this guideline! Though it is welcomed it is not necessary&#8212;nor should it be overused for lack of clearer diction. As always, be organized! Have a clear introduction that sets the tone for the remainder of the essay. Do not leave the reader guessing about the purpose of your narrative. Remember, you are in control of the essay, so guide it where you desire (just make sure your audience can follow your lead). Resources Purdue Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Campus Map Careers Directory Faculty and Staff Human Resources University Event Calendar College of Liberal Arts Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> CLA Administration CLA Business Office CLA Directory CLA Marketing &amp; Communication Faculty &amp; Staff Resources Purdue OWL Staff/Student Applications Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> BoilerConnect Brightspace myPurdue OneCampus Portal Office 365 Outlook Facebook Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Twitter Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> YouTube Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Instagram Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> LinkedIn Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> Purdue OWL is a registered trademark. Copyright &#169;2026 by The On-Campus Writing Lab &#160;&amp; The OWL at Purdue &#160;and Purdue University . This material may not be published, reproduced, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed without permission. This website collects and publishes the ideas of individuals who have contributed those ideas in their capacities as faculty-mentored student scholars. The materials collected here do not express the views of, or positions held by, Purdue University. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our terms and conditions of fair use . Privacy policy .