Content design: planning, writing and managing content - Guidance - GOV.UK Cookies on GOV.UK We use some essential cookies to make this website work. We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services. We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services. You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. Accept additional cookies Reject additional cookies View cookies Hide cookie message Skip to main content GOV.UK Navigation menu Menu Menu Services and information Benefits Births, death, marriages and care Business and self-employed Childcare and parenting Citizenship and living in the UK Crime, justice and the law Disabled people Driving and transport Education and learning Employing people Environment and countryside Housing and local services Money and tax Passports, travel and living abroad Visas and immigration Working, jobs and pensions Government activity Departments Departments, agencies and public bodies News News stories, speeches, letters and notices Guidance and regulation Detailed guidance, regulations and rules Research and statistics Reports, analysis and official statistics Policy papers and consultations Consultations and strategy Transparency Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports Search GOV.UK &times; Search GOV.UK Search Search GOV.UK Search Home Government content and publishing Content design: planning, writing and managing content From: Government Digital Service Published 25 February 2016 Updated: 7 January 2026 - See all updates Search this manual Search Summary Planning and managing digital content to meet the needs the public has of government. Contents What is content design? Introduction to content design. User needs How to write and record a user need for GOV.UK. Planning content Find out how to decide if something is suitable for GOV.UK, what the content lifecycle is and why accessibility must be planned for. Helping users prepare for change How to plan and create guidance about a change to a policy, scheme or process so that users know what they must do and when. Content types When and how to use the GOV.UK formats. Organising and grouping content on GOV.UK When to use the different options for grouping content on GOV.UK: topics, mainstream browse and collections. Writing for GOV.UK How to write well for your audience, including specialists. Content maintenance How to manage your content. Withdrawing or unpublishing content, and content from previous governments When you should withdraw content, when you should unpublish content, and what content gets labelled as from a previous government. Research and evidence Tools and evidence to back up content design decisions. Welsh language on GOV.UK The policy governing use of Welsh language on GOV.UK. Links Adding links to content, making them accessible and GOV.UK&#39;s external linking policy. URL standards for GOV.UK You must meet these standards when creating URLs to be used on GOV.UK Data and analytics Find out how to use tools like Google Analytics and Content Data to get data on how users are interacting with GOV.UK content and improve search engine optimisation (SEO). Images Guidance for GOV.UK content publishers on how to use images and make them accessible. This chapter also includes the copyright standards for GOV.UK. Campaigns on GOV.UK: standards and guidelines Options to support promotions and marketing campaigns, from short URLs to standalone websites. Guidance for publishing on GOV.UK during a general election Find out what can and cannot be published during a pre-election period. Guidance for publishing on GOV.UK, exempt websites and service domains after a royal death (a &#39;Bridge&#39; event) Find out what can and cannot be published. Use of government logos on GOV.UK When government logos can be used on GOV.UK. Use of European Union funding logos on GOV.UK GOV.UK policy on use of the EU logos for EU funding schemes. Blogging How and when to publish a blog. Tables When to use tables and how to make them accessible. Feedback How to send the Government Digital Service comments and suggestions about this manual. Print this page Is this page useful? Maybe Yes this page is useful No this page is not useful Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Do not include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab and requires JavaScript ) . Cancel Services and information Benefits Births, death, marriages and care Business and self-employed Childcare and parenting Citizenship and living in the UK Crime, justice and the law Disabled people Driving and transport Education and learning Employing people Environment and countryside Housing and local services Money and tax Passports, travel and living abroad Visas and immigration Working, jobs and pensions Government activity Departments News Guidance and regulation Research and statistics Policy papers and consultations Transparency How government works Get involved Support links Help Privacy Cookies Accessibility statement Contact Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg Government Digital Service All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0 , except where otherwise stated © Crown copyright