Updates - Content design: planning, writing and managing content - Guidance - GOV.UK Cookies on GOV.UK We use some essential cookies to make this website work. We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services. We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services. You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. Accept additional cookies Reject additional cookies View cookies Hide cookie message Skip to main content GOV.UK Navigation menu Menu Menu Services and information Benefits Births, death, marriages and care Business and self-employed Childcare and parenting Citizenship and living in the UK Crime, justice and the law Disabled people Driving and transport Education and learning Employing people Environment and countryside Housing and local services Money and tax Passports, travel and living abroad Visas and immigration Working, jobs and pensions Government activity Departments Departments, agencies and public bodies News News stories, speeches, letters and notices Guidance and regulation Detailed guidance, regulations and rules Research and statistics Reports, analysis and official statistics Policy papers and consultations Consultations and strategy Transparency Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports Search GOV.UK &times; Search GOV.UK Search Search GOV.UK Search Home Government content and publishing Content design: planning, writing and managing content From: Government Digital Service Published 25 February 2016 Updated: 7 January 2026 Search this manual Search Back to contents Updates: Content design: planning, writing and managing content 2026 7 January 2026 published amendments Tables Added guidance that line breaks should not be used in cells. 2025 5 December 2025 published amendments Writing for GOV.UK Added guidance on using abbreviations in titles. 4 August 2025 published amendments User needs Maslow (the user needs tool) has now been retired. Added guidance about how publishers should now record user needs for GOV.UK content. 22 July 2025 published amendments Content types Updated to reflect that you can now make any image the lead image of a news article or case study, and not just the first image you upload. 2 May 2025 published amendments Data and analytics Updated to reflect changes to Google Analytics since the introduction of GA4. Added template explorations and created a task-based structure to the content. 23 April 2025 published amendments Images Updated information on using images with text. This should be avoided in all types of images. 5 February 2025 published amendments Content types Added guidance about specialist finders. 2024 19 December 2024 published amendments Links Added 'Check the URL of your links' section so that only the destination URL is used when copying and pasting from an external source. 13 November 2024 published amendments Content types Updated the 'Topical event pages' section to add that it's now possible to feature 6 documents. 6 November 2024 published amendments URL standards for GOV.UK Clarifying that acronyms should only be used in URLs if they're well known or they're for an organisation with a long name. 24 September 2024 published amendments Content types Updated 'Publication: official documents' to explain the format requirements and add examples. 23 September 2024 published amendments Content types Updated 'Publication: statistics' to reflect the name change from 'national statistics' to 'accredited official statistics'. 12 September 2024 published amendments Writing for GOV.UK Updated ‘Writing for GOV.UK’ section: added guidance about not using offensive language, words or terms in GOV.UK content. 14 August 2024 published amendments Planning content Clarified the legal responsibility of inaccessible content. Content types Clarified the legal responsibility of inaccessible content. Writing for GOV.UK Explained WCAG is Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 9 August 2024 published amendments Tables The latest accessibility audit flagged numerous issues with tables in GOV.UK. Most of the issues are content design errors and the updates cover the most commonly made mistakes and how they can be avoided. User research also showed that people were confused by the terminology used when describing tables so an example table has been added. 1 August 2024 published amendments Campaigns on GOV.UK: standards and guidelines Added a new section about creating a short URL for campaign sites. 29 July 2024 published amendments Planning content Updated the 'Publishing content on a new website (getting an exemption from GOV.UK)' section. Organisations with an exemption must follow The National Archives' rules for publishing official documents. 15 July 2024 published amendments Guidance for publishing on GOV.UK during a general election Updated the chapter to reflect the end of the pre-election period for the 2024 General Election. 30 May 2024 published amendments Guidance for publishing on GOV.UK during the pre-election period New section added. 25 April 2024 published amendments Content types Added a new section about fatality notices. 2023 30 November 2023 published amendments Content types Updated guidance on what to use a document collection for to include grouping related content on a topic 28 November 2023 published amendments Data and analytics Information added on the GovSearch tool. 16 November 2023 published amendments Content types Added information about licence pages. 25 October 2023 published amendments Organising and grouping content on GOV.UK Changed ## Document collections to remove guidance saying that this content type cannot be used to group content thematically (because document collections can be used to group content thematically). 30 August 2023 published amendments Content types Updated the good example for the promotional material content type. 8 August 2023 published amendments Content types Information on Call for evidence, a new content type in Whitehall. 3 August 2023 published amendments Withdrawing or unpublishing content, and content from previous governments Under 'Unpublishing content items', document collections added to list of content types that users who have subscribed to email updates about that page will be notified about when the page is unpublished. Writing for GOV.UK Document collections added to examples of content types that need change notes. 18 July 2023 published amendments Planning content Added information on adding a review date to your content in the Understanding the content lifecycle section. Content maintenance Information about adding an optional review date which is a new feature in Whitehall. 16 May 2023 published amendments Content types Updated how lead images are used in the following content types: * Case study * News article : government response * News article : news story * News article : press release 17 January 2023 published amendments Images Restructured to expand the section on using charts, diagrams, infographics and scientific equations as images. Clarified alt text should only be used in the body text and there is no need to use the alt text field. 2022 1 December 2022 published amendments Writing for GOV.UK Updated the guidance on headings in the 'Structuring your content' section to make the rules around heading levels clearer. 22 November 2022 published amendments Guidance for publishing on GOV.UK, exempt websites and service domains after a royal death (a &#39;Bridge&#39; event) Section not new - just reordered. 8 November 2022 published amendments Links Updated with a new section on how to link to documents on other websites. 28 October 2022 published amendments Content types Added a new 'Publication: maps' section, as this publication type was missing from the previous content. 13 October 2022 published amendments Writing for GOV.UK Added information to the ‘headings’ section about not using questions in headings and subheadings. 5 October 2022 published amendments Campaigns on GOV.UK: standards and guidelines The section has been updated with amended guidance on getting your campaign online and managing it once it's live. 13 September 2022 published amendments Guidance for publishing on GOV.UK, exempt websites and service domains after the death of Her Majesty The Queen New section added on what can and cannot be published during the national mourning period following the death of HM The Queen. 23 August 2022 published amendments Images Updated with new guidance on how to make images accessible, with more detail about how and when to use alt text, and how to describe images that present a lot of data, such as graphs and diagrams. The section on copyright is unchanged. 24 June 2022 published amendments Links Added a section on linking to a page in a different language. This is because a link text must accurately describe the link destination for accessibility and prepare the users for a language change in their journey. 6 June 2022 published amendments Planning content New guidance has been added on how to get an exemption for publishing new content somewhere other than on GOV.UK, and what to do if you don't get one. 5 May 2022 published amendments Writing for GOV.UK Updated the headings section to clarify whether text is always necessary between headings for accessibility. 18 February 2022 published amendments Writing for GOV.UK Removing examples in the 'Summaries' section that are no longer accurate. Making the information in the 'Titles' section more concise. Fixing several broken links. 15 February 2022 published amendments Planning content Added link to more government digital accessibility guidance and to sign-up form to receive updates. 24 January 2022 published amendments Withdrawing or unpublishing content, and content from previous governments Updated guidance on unpublishing content items to explain that users will get an email update if a publication, consultation or detailed guide they've subscribed to is unpublished or redirected. 6 January 2022 published amendments Content types Added good example of an Organisation page. 4 January 2022 published amendments Content types Changed link to example of a good 'Our governance' content type. 2021 21 December 2021 published amendments Links Added information so content designers know to avoid using one word links 3 November 2021 published amendments Writing for GOV.UK Added a video on how a screenreader interacts with headings structures to show why a proper heading strcuture is important. 29 October 2021 published amendments Content types Added examples of what corporate information will display on an organisation page, and that you should include an organisation chart. Specified that all featured management members should have their photo displayed on the organisation page. Data and analytics Updated the instructions on using Google Ads. Removed examples that relied on PDFs of screenshots. Removed sections on the 'performance platform' and 'info pages'. 25 August 2021 published amendments Writing for GOV.UK Updated legal information on duplicate page titles. 3 August 2021 published amendments Links [Links](/guidance/content-design/links) Added guidance on linking to attachments. Planning content Added a link to the Guidance and tools for digital accessibility under accessibility and removed the existing links to various manuals. 8 July 2021 published amendments Images Changes to the ‘Graphs and charts’ section: More guidance on how to produce accessible graphs and charts. How and why to use an SVG image file. Why pie charts are not accessible. Further guidance on describing visual information as text. 30 June 2021 published amendments Planning content Updated guidance about open formats especially for documents designed to be edited such as forms. Content types Updated general guidance in 'Publications' on file formats including HTML, forms and PDFs. Updated the ‘Publication: Forms’ section with a better example and also linked to instructions on how to create a simple OpenDocument form. 14 May 2021 published amendments Helping users prepare for change Removed last section 'Preparing users for changes related to the end of the transition period with the EU'. 20 April 2021 published amendments URL standards for GOV.UK Updated the URL standards for GOV.UK. Made changes to the format. 24 March 2021 published amendments Links Adding guidance on anchor links 17 March 2021 published amendments Images Link added to further guidance on publishing easy read images. 18 February 2021 published amendments Content types Updated content type examples to live pages 25 January 2021 published amendments Images Do not add alt text for Easy Read images. The concept or task should be explained in the words which accompany the image. 22 January 2021 published amendments Planning content 'Whitehall publisher: publish documents designed for print as PDF' - included Official documents as an example of documents which can be published as PDF 13 January 2021 published amendments Writing for GOV.UK Added a section on using sub-headings before a start button. 7 January 2021 published amendments Writing for GOV.UK Guidance added on sub-headings before a start button and accessibility. 2020 4 December 2020 published amendments Planning content PDFs on GOV.UK must either become HTML, or have an HTML or other OpenDocument version to meet accessibility standards Content types PDFs on GOV.UK must either become HTML or have an HTML or other OpenDocument version to meet accessibility standards 12 November 2020 published amendments Helping users prepare for change In the new section “If the rules depend on whether a user is covered by the withdrawal agreement”: Added details on how to write about the withdrawal agreement. 9 November 2020 published amendments Helping users prepare for change Content related to the end of the transition period should now be tagged to 'Brexit transition: new rules for 2021' rather than 'UK and EU transition: new rules for 2021'. 26 October 2020 published amendments Helping users prepare for change In sections 1, 3 and ‘Preparing users for changes related to the end of the transition period with the EU’: Clarified the differences between handling specialist (Whitehall) and mainstream content which will change as a result of the end of the transition period. All other changes are updates to sections of ‘Preparing users for changes related to the end of the transition period with the EU’. In ‘Planning and writing post-transition content’: All topics affected by transition must have post-transition content based on the rules which will apply from January 2021. This content should not be withdrawn or unpublished without agreement from the Brexit content team at GDS. In ‘Planning and writing post-transition content’: Publishers should not create post-transition pages to summarise and link to other post-transition content across different topics for a specific sector or user group. In ‘Creating a separate post-transition page’: Publishers do not need to use the post-transition call-out box on document collection pages. In the new section on ‘Reassuring users that nothing has changed yet’: It's no longer necessary to restrict reassurance content to a line at the top of the page, but it should still only be added if there's a genuine user need. Reassurance content should focus on the user not the government. It should not explain why nothing has changed, for example by referring to the Withdrawal Agreement. In the new section on ‘Updating post-transition content’: Added details about how to request a change to the transition checker service, and how to report changes which might affect the checker or have an impact on cross-government communications activities. 22 October 2020 published amendments Helping users prepare for change Content related to the end of the transition period should now be tagged to 'UK and EU transition: new rules for 2021' rather than 'transition period'. 19 October 2020 published amendments Writing for GOV.UK Reworked advice on headings to make sure content is presented accessibly, including why using bold for headings causes accessibility problems. 18 September 2020 published amendments Blogging Updates to blogging guidance to reflect changed processes. 9 September 2020 published amendments Writing for GOV.UK Accessibility changes: improved guidance on how to make titles unique and check they're not already in use 4 September 2020 published amendments Tables Accessibility change: tables with headings in the first column must use the heading Markdown: # Added a video link showing how screen readers use headings to make table content accessible. 28 August 2020 published amendments Planning content Added links to guidance on how to plan and create content to help users prepare for policy changes, including changes related to the end of the transition period with the EU. Tables Accessibility change: how to use headings to make tables accessible. 26 August 2020 published amendments Content types Added an explanation of where links to corporate information pages show automatically on organisation and about us pages. 25 August 2020 published amendments Images Updated the guidance to: write image descriptions in the body text so they’re available to more people, and leave the 'Alt text' field empty so screen reading software skips it. 13 August 2020 published amendments Helping users prepare for change Added new 'Helping users prepare for change' section. 19 May 2020 published amendments Content types Removed guidance about 'policies' and 'sub-policies' as these content types are no longer available. 28 April 2020 published amendments Writing for GOV.UK Updated to include: information on where change notes trigger email alerts, new sections on how and when to use change notes, additional examples. 10 March 2020 published amendments Images Updated section slug from guidance/content-design/image-copyright-standards-for-gov-uk to guidance/content-design/images 5 March 2020 published amendments Telling users about changes resulting from Brexit Removing out of date Brexit publishing guidance. Withdrawing or unpublishing content, and content from previous governments We now cross reference the full guidance on history mode instead of including it in 2 places. 4 February 2020 published amendments Content types Removed information about corporate reports appearing on organisation pages as it was out of date. 2019 18 September 2019 published amendments Telling users about changes resulting from Brexit Changed 'the UK leaving the EU' to 'Brexit' in some places as it’s a more commonly used term. Planning content Changed 'the UK leaving the EU' to 'Brexit' in the link text to match the updated title of the linked guidance 17 September 2019 published amendments Planning content Added instructions on how to download a list of all content using the Content Data tool. Writing for GOV.UK Added information on how to use the Content Data tool to check that content is working for users. Content maintenance Added guidance on how to download a list of pages using Content Data. Research and evidence Added Content Data as a tool to support content design Data and analytics Updated with guidance about using the Content Data tool. Images Updated alt text guidance to clarify that - if the information contained in an image is already covered by surrounding text content - you should not duplicate it in the alt text. 5 September 2019 published amendments Organising and grouping content on GOV.UK Updated information about document collections to expand what content can be added. 27 August 2019 published amendments URL standards for GOV.UK Updated guidelines for organisation and sub-organisation short urls in the 'URL standards for GOV.UK' section of the manual. Organisation and sub-organisation short URLs should use whole words where possible and only use acronyms if they're well known. 22 August 2019 published amendments Writing for GOV.UK Added link to linking guidance. 16 August 2019 published amendments Content types Information added on the new Corporate information: accessible documents policy format. 7 August 2019 published amendments Content types Removed reference to ‘campaign pages’ as they are no longer available on GOV.UK. Campaigns on GOV.UK: standards and guidelines Removed references to ‘campaign pages’ as these are no longer available on GOV.UK. 6 August 2019 published amendments Content types Changed command paper prefix from 'Cm' to 'CP'. 24 July 2019 published amendments Images Improving links between guidance pages on publishing images. 9 July 2019 published amendments Withdrawing and unpublishing (removing) content, and labelling content from previous governments Changed 'remove' to 'unpublish'. Unpublish is the term used in the publishing workflow. 13 June 2019 published amendments Organising and grouping content on GOV.UK Add an onward link to request a new or existing topic to the topic taxonomy (http://www.gov.uk/guidance/contact-the-government-digital-service/request-a-thing#topics), and another link to the taxonomy principles (http://www.gov.uk/government/publications/govuk-topic-taxonomy-principles/govuk-taxonomy-principles). 16 May 2019 published amendments Links The 'external linking policy' has been rewritten for clarity. The policy remains the same. 11 February 2019 published amendments Images New guidance added about when and how to use diagrams on GOV.UK, including how to make them accessible. 2018 10 December 2018 published amendments Telling users about changes resulting from the UK leaving the EU New section added. 13 November 2018 published amendments Blogging Several changes to the "Creating and editing blog posts" section. New sections added on breaking up text, featured posts and link text. Expanded the guidance on excerpt text, calls to action and updated guidance on images, titles and social media. Removed sections on social media widgets, Twitter feeds and image formats. 12 October 2018 published amendments Content types Added 'Publication: official documents' to the content types section, with instructions on what to include in HTML versions of official documents. 26 September 2018 published amendments Organising and grouping content on GOV.UK Removed guidance about policies and policy areas because they're about to be retired from GOV.UK. 23 August 2018 published amendments Links Added section about providing links in context at the top of the page. 8 August 2018 published amendments Content types Added guidance on how to structure a document collection to help users find content easier on a collection page. 30 July 2018 published amendments Organising and grouping content on GOV.UK Added guidance for when not to use a document collection for content that's too long and complex or takes a user through a task. 23 July 2018 published amendments Content types Removed guidance on sub-topics. Organising and grouping content on GOV.UK Added guidance about using topics to group and organise all content. Removed guidance about legacy topic pages (specialist sectors) and policies. 16 July 2018 published amendments Planning content Added a new section to explain when to tell users about a scheme or process changing in the future. 5 July 2018 published amendments Links Added examples of how to link to third party services. 29 June 2018 published amendments Images Rewritten copyright guidance in plain English. 22 June 2018 published amendments Planning content Update to the 'Planning content’ section. Expanded definitions of 'guidance for mainstream users' and 'guidance for specialist users', including who the users are and how each type of guidance is written, organised and managed. 8 June 2018 publi