Voice and tone &nbsp;|&nbsp; Google developer documentation style guide &nbsp;|&nbsp; Google for Developers Skip to main content Google developer documentation style guide / English Deutsch Español Français Indonesia Português – Brasil Русский 中文 – 简体 日本語 한국어 Sign in Google developer documentation style guide Guides Introduction About this guide Highlights What&#39;s new Philosophy of this guide Key resources Word list Product names Text-formatting summary General principles Accessibility Excessive claims Future features Global audience Inclusive language Jargon Prescriptive documentation Third-party content Timeless documentation Voice and tone Language and grammar Abbreviations Active voice Anthropomorphism Articles (a, an, the) Capitalization Contractions Pluralization Possessives Prepositions Present tense Pronouns Second person Sentence structure Verbs in reference documents Punctuation Colons Commas Dashes Ellipses Hyphens Parentheses Periods and end punctuation Quotation marks Semicolons Slashes Formatting and organization Dates and times Examples Figures and other images Footnotes Headings and titles Italics with terms Lists Mathematical notation Notes and other notices Numbers Paragraphs Phone numbers Procedures Tables Units of measurement Linking Cross-references and linking Headings as link targets Computer interfaces API reference code comments Code in text Code samples Command-line syntax Placeholder formatting UI elements and interaction HTML and CSS HTML and semantic tagging HTML formatting Markdown versus HTML Names and naming Example domains and names Filenames Trademarks Home Products Style Send feedback Voice and tone Stay organized with collections Save and categorize content based on your preferences. Page Summary outlined_flag Write in a conversational, friendly, and respectful tone that is approachable and easy to understand, avoiding slang and overly casual language. Prioritize clear and straightforward language, using simple and consistent writing to cater to a global audience with varying levels of English proficiency. Avoid jargon, clichés, and culturally specific references, focusing on delivering information concisely and directly to the reader. Strive for a natural and engaging tone, letting your personality shine through while keeping the primary focus on providing clear and useful information efficiently. Ensure politeness without overusing &quot;please&quot; in instructions, and focus on delivering information in a direct and helpful manner. In your documents, aim for a voice and tone that's conversational, friendly, and respectful without using slang or being overly colloquial or frivolous; a voice that's casual and natural and approachable, not pedantic or pushy. Try to sound like a knowledgeable friend who understands what the developer wants to do. Don't try to write exactly the way you speak; you probably speak more colloquially and verbosely than you should write, at least for developer documentation. But aim for a conversational tone rather than a formal one. Don't try to be super-entertaining, but also don't aim for super-dry. Be human, let your personality show, and be memorable. But remember that the primary purpose of the document is to provide information to someone who's looking for it and may be in a hurry. Consider that readers come from many different cultures and may have varying levels of ability reading English. As much as possible, avoid culturally specific references. Simple and consistent writing can also make it easier to translate documents into other languages. For more information, see Writing for a global audience . For other writing best practices, see the following resources: Write accessible documentation Write inclusive documentation Some things to avoid where possible Buzzwords or technical jargon . Being too cutesy. Ableist language or figures of speech. Placeholder phrases like please note and at this time. Choppy or long-winded sentences. Starting all sentences with the same phrase (such as You can or To do ). Current pop-culture references. Exclamation marks. In general, avoid exclamation points. See Specific guidance on exclamation points . Wackiness, zaniness, and goofiness. Mixing metaphors or taking a metaphor too far. Phrasing that denigrates or insults any group of people. Phrasing in terms of let's do something. Using phrases like simply , It's that simple , It's easy , or quickly in a procedure. Internet slang, or other internet abbreviations such as tl;dr or ymmv . Some techniques and approaches to consider If you're having trouble expressing something, step back and ask yourself, "What am I trying to say?" Often, the answer you give yourself reveals what you should be saying in the document. If you're uncertain about your phrasing or tone, ask a colleague to take a look. Try reading parts of your document out loud, or at least mouthing the words. Does it sound natural? Not every sentence has to sound natural when spoken; these are written documents. But if you come across a sentence that's awkward or confusing when spoken, consider whether you can make it more conversational. Use transitions between sentences. Phrases like Though or This way can make paragraphs less stilted. (Then again, sometimes transitions like However or Nonetheless can make paragraphs more stilted.) Even if you're having trouble hitting the right tone, make sure you're communicating useful information in a clear and direct way; that's the most important part. Politeness and use of please It's great to be polite, but using please in a set of instructions is overdoing the politeness. Recommended : To view the document, click View . Not recommended : To view the document, please click View . Recommended : For more information, see [link to other document]. Not recommended : For more information, please see [link to other document]. Examples Too informal Just about right Too formal Dude! This API is totally awesome! This API lets you collect data about what your users like. The API documented by this page may enable the acquisition of information pertaining to user preferences. Just like a certain pop star, this call gets your telephone number. The easy way to ask for someone's digits! To get the user's phone number, call user.phoneNumber.get . The telephone number can be retrieved by the developer via the simple expedient of using the get method on the user object's phoneNumber property. Then—BOOM—just garbage-collect, and you're golden. To clean up, call the collectGarbage method. Please note that completion of the task requires the following prerequisite: executing an automated memory management function. Send feedback Except as otherwise noted, the content of this page is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License , and code samples are licensed under the Apache 2.0 License . For details, see the Google Developers Site Policies . Java is a registered trademark of Oracle and/or its affiliates. Last updated 2026-01-13 UTC. Need to tell us more? [[["Easy to understand","easyToUnderstand","thumb-up"],["Solved my problem","solvedMyProblem","thumb-up"],["Other","otherUp","thumb-up"]],[["Missing the information I need","missingTheInformationINeed","thumb-down"],["Too complicated / too many steps","tooComplicatedTooManySteps","thumb-down"],["Out of date","outOfDate","thumb-down"],["Samples / code issue","samplesCodeIssue","thumb-down"],["Other","otherDown","thumb-down"]],["Last updated 2026-01-13 UTC."],[],["Aim for a conversational, friendly, and respectful tone in documents, avoiding slang, excessive formality, or overly entertaining language. Be clear, direct, and consider a global audience by avoiding jargon, cultural references, and overly complex language. Prioritize providing useful information efficiently. Refrain from using overly polite phrasing like \"please\" in instructions, and ensure sentences are varied and not repetitive. Review writing for natural flow by reading it aloud, and seek peer feedback.\n"]] Connect Blog Bluesky Instagram LinkedIn X (Twitter) YouTube Programs Google Developer Program Google Developer Groups Google Developer Experts Accelerators Google Cloud & NVIDIA Developer consoles Google API Console Google Cloud Platform Console Google Play Console Firebase Console Actions on Google Console Cast SDK Developer Console Chrome Web Store Dashboard Google Home Developer Console Android Chrome Firebase Google Cloud Platform Google AI All products Terms Privacy Manage cookies English Deutsch Español Français Indonesia Português – Brasil Русский 中文 – 简体 日本語 한국어