The Options Institute | Cboe Options Institute Menu Skip Menu Items Options Basics Tools All Tools Options Calculator Trade Alert Trade Optimizer Research Archives Events Glossary About Us About the OI Research Grant Adjunct Faculty Program Contact Us Hey, you made it to The Options Institute! We've been helping people like you learn options trading for 40 years. The latest from The OI in your inbox. Click to subscribe. Sign up to amp up options education Please make sure to enter all fields correctly Oops, looks like you got your email wrong. Select Language English Hindi Spanish French German Dutch Russian * Yes, I acknowledge that Cboe may contact me about Cboe activities, products and services. I understand that I can unsubscribe from communications from Cboe at any time. * Yes, I agree to the terms of Cboe Privacy Notice and Policy and acknowledge that my personal data will be processed in accordance with policy. Oops, please validate the captcha --> Subscribe Thanks for signing up, let the options learning begin! By signing up, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy and to receive electronic communications from Cboe Exchanges, Inc., which may include marketing promotions, advertising, and sponsored content. --> Options Basics ARTICLE &amp; VIDEO Options 101 ARTICLE &amp; VIDEO Why Trade Options View all articles &amp; videos What else should you expect? Qualified Experts Clear, straightforward information from the experts who basically invented options trading. Welcome, young grasshoppers. Tools Don't just invest, invest super smartly. Here you'll find a variety of super useful, super interactive tools to get you there! Courses Everything from virtual courses to in-person options for mastering the heck out of options. We're ready when you are. Sign up to amp up options education Please make sure to enter all fields correctly Oops, looks like you got your email wrong. Select Language English Hindi Spanish French German Dutch Russian * Yes, I acknowledge that Cboe may contact me about Cboe activities, products and services. I understand that I can unsubscribe from communications from Cboe at any time. * Yes, I agree to the terms of Cboe Privacy Notice and Policy and acknowledge that my personal data will be processed in accordance with policy. Oops, please validate the captcha --> Subscribe Thanks for signing up, let the options learning begin! By signing up, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy and to receive electronic communications from Cboe Exchanges, Inc., which may include marketing promotions, advertising, and sponsored content. --> Courses Alright, it's time to tackle an actual course. Let's see if options tickle your fancy, shall we? View Options 101 Course Options 101 With Sr. OI Instructors Events All year long, The Options Institute invites you to enjoy a series of events and webinars — anything and everything you can imagine — to learn about options. See All Events Spread the Risk: Option Spread Strategies Date: Tuesday, April 28 2026 Time: 12:30 pm (CT) Speaker: Richard Excell Register Now Single Stock vs. Index Options: What&#39;s the Difference and Why It Matters Date: Wednesday, April 29 2026 Time: 11:00 am (CT) Speaker: Stacey Gilbert Register Now Contact The Options Institute Reach out to our experts and learn how to do what they do. Inquire about a custom curriculum for an individual, a small group, or your entire company. Request information on how to sponsor an OI event or an OI research grant. Ask us about joining our Adjunct Faculty Program and request an application. Contact The Options Institute Wanna learn options? Let's go! Please make sure to enter all fields correctly Oops, looks like you got your email wrong. Select Language English Hindi Spanish French German Dutch Russian * Yes, I acknowledge that Cboe may contact me about Cboe activities, products and services. I understand that I can unsubscribe from communications from Cboe at any time. * Yes, I agree to the terms of Cboe Privacy Notice and Policy and acknowledge that my personal data will be processed in accordance with policy. Oops, please validate the captcha --> Subscribe Thanks for signing up, let the options learning begin! By signing up, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy and to receive electronic communications from Cboe Exchanges, Inc., which may include marketing promotions, advertising, and sponsored content. --> Accessibility Use of Content Privacy Statement Copyright, Trademark &amp; Patents Terms &amp; Conditions Biometric Information Privacy Policy OCC &amp; Investor Protection Check us out on Twitter Check us out on Youtube Check us out on Facebook Check us out on Linkedin &#169; 2022 Cboe Exchange, Inc. All Rights Reserved Options are not suitable for all investors. Before trading options, you should discuss with your broker whether trading options is right for you and review the Characteristics and Risks of Standardized Options (or Options Disclosure Document) regarding risks associated with trading options.