The Basics of Intel® Architecture Skip To Main Content Toggle Navigation Sign In My Intel My Tools ? Sign Out English Select Your Language Bahasa Indonesia Deutsch English Español Français Português Tiếng Việt ไทย 한국어 日本語 简体中文 繁體中文 Toggle Search Search Close Search Panel Advanced Search close Top Results --> Sign In to access restricted content Using Intel.com Search You can easily search the entire Intel.com site in several ways. Brand Name: Core i9 Document Number: 123456 Code Name: Emerald Rapids Special Operators: “Ice Lake”, Ice AND Lake, Ice OR Lake, Ice* Quick Links You can also try the quick links below to see results for most popular searches. Product Information Support Drivers & Software Recent Searches Sign In to access restricted content Advanced Search All of these terms Any of these terms Exact term only Find results with All Results Product Information Support Drivers & Software Documentation & Resources Solutions --> Partners Communities Corporate Show results from Only search in Title Description Content ID Search Sign in to access restricted content. The browser version you are using is not recommended for this site. Please consider upgrading to the latest version of your browser by clicking one of the following links. Safari Chrome Edge Firefox The Basics of Intel® Architecture Share Bookmark Download ID 786255 Date 2024-02-09 Public View More See Less A preview is not available for this record, please engage by choosing from the available options ‘download’ or ‘view’ to engage with the material Description This document was published under Document Number: 330119. White Paper: Describes the basic operation and function of platform ingredients and critical support components used in three classes of Intel® architecture platforms, including the Intel® Atom™ and Intel® Core™ processors. (v.1, Jan. 2014) Usage instructions Get Help Company Overview Contact Intel Newsroom Investors Careers Corporate Responsibility Inclusion Public Policy © Intel Corporation Terms of Use *Trademarks Cookies Privacy Supply Chain Transparency Site Map Recycling Your Privacy Choices California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) Opt-Out Icon Notice at Collection Intel technologies may require enabled hardware, software or service activation. // No product or component can be absolutely secure. // Your costs and results may vary. // Performance varies by use, configuration, and other factors. Learn more at intel.com/performanceindex . // See our complete legal Notices and Disclaimers . // Intel is committed to respecting human rights and avoiding causing or contributing to adverse impacts on human rights. See Intel’s Global Human Rights Principles . Intel’s products and software are intended only to be used in applications that do not cause or contribute to adverse impacts on human rights.