Spotlighting The World Factbook as We Bid a Fond Farewell - CIA &lt;style type=&quot;text/css&quot;&gt; .no-show { display: none; } .disable-fade-in{ opacity: 1 !important; transform: none !important; visibility: visible !important; } &lt;/style&gt; Skip to main content Contact Contact Report Information Report Information Central Intelligence Agency Central Intelligence Agency Search CIA.gov Search Button to search CIA content. Today&#x27;s CIA About Leadership Organization Mission &amp; Vision Partner with CIA Technology Privacy Careers Career Opportunities Hiring Process Benefits Accommodations Language Opportunities Veterans Student Programs Legacy Origin History Museum Headquarters Trailblazers In Memoriam Newsroom News and Stories Press Releases and Statements Speeches and Transcripts The Langley Files Podcast Library Resources Publications Prepublication Review Study of Intelligence CIA Reports CIA Maps FOIA Reading Room Contact CIA Report Information Stories Spotlighting The World Factbook as We Bid a Fond Farewell February 4, 2026 One of CIA’s oldest and most recognizable intelligence publications, The World Factbook, has sunset. The World Factbook served the Intelligence Community and the general public as a longstanding, one-stop basic reference about countries and communities around the globe. Let’s take a quick look into the history of The World Factbook. Over many decades , The World Factbook evolved from a classified to unclassified, hardcopy to electronic product that added new categories, and even new global entities. The original classified publication, titled The National Basic Intelligence Factbook , launched in 1962. The first unclassified companion version was issued in 1971. A decade later it was renamed The World Factbook. In 1997, The World Factbook went digital and debuted to a worldwide audience on CIA.gov, where it garnered millions of views each year. The World Factbook appealed to researchers, news organizations, teachers, students, and international travelers. Some readers even inquired whether their preferred geographic designation or world entity could be included on the high-profile site. Finally, only CIA insiders would know that officers donated some of their personal travel photos to The World Factbook, which hosted more than 5,000 photographs that were copyright-free for anyone to access and use. Though the World Factbook is gone, in the spirit of its global reach and legacy, we hope you will stay curious about the world and find ways to explore it… in person or virtually. Explore More Stories History of the World Factbook Learn More Arrow Right Icon Wanderers in a Wonderful World Learn More Arrow Right Icon Telling Data Stories: An Interview with CIA’s Dr. Calvin Andrus Learn More Arrow Right Icon Agency About CIA Leadership Organization Mission and Vision CIA Museum Careers Career Opportunities Hiring Process Student Programs Accommodations MyLINK Resources News and Stories Center for the Study of Intelligence (CSI) World Leaders The Langley Files Spy Kids Helpful Links Partner with CIA Prepublication Review Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) Frequently Asked Questions Privacy Policy Contact CIA Contact CIA Report Information Report Information Connect with CIA Instagram Facebook X LinkedIn YouTube Flickr Telegram Search CIA.gov Site Policies Privacy No FEAR Act EEO Inspector General USA.gov Sitemap