--> Action-based Theories of Perception (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy) Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Menu Browse Table of Contents What's New Random Entry Chronological Archives About Editorial Information About the SEP Editorial Board How to Cite the SEP Special Characters Advanced Tools Contact Support SEP Support the SEP PDFs for SEP Friends Make a Donation SEPIA for Libraries Entry Navigation Entry Contents Bibliography Academic Tools Friends PDF Preview Author and Citation Info Back to Top Action-based Theories of Perception First published Wed Jul 8, 2015; substantive revision Tue Sep 19, 2023 Action is a means of acquiring perceptual information about the environment. Turning around, for example, alters your spatial relations to surrounding objects and, hence, which of their properties you visually perceive. Moving your hand over an object&rsquo;s surface enables you to feel its shape, temperature, and texture. Sniffing and walking around a room enables you to track down the source of an unpleasant smell. Active or passive movements of the body can also generate useful sources of perceptual information (Gibson 1966, 1979). The pattern of optic flow in the retinal image produced by forward locomotion, for example, contains information about the direction in which you are heading, while motion parallax is a &ldquo;cue&rdquo; used by the visual system to estimate the relative distances of objects in your field of view. In these uncontroversial ways and others, perception is instrumentally dependent on action. According to an explanatory framework that Susan Hurley (1998) dubs the &ldquo;Input-Output Picture&rdquo;, the dependence of perception on action is purely instrumental: Movement can alter sensory inputs and so result in different perceptions&hellip; changes in output are merely a means to changes in input, on which perception depends directly. (1998: 342) The different action-based theories of perception, reviewed in this entry, challenge the Input-Output Picture. They maintain that perception can also depend in a noninstrumental or constitutive way on action (or, more generally, on capacities for object-directed motor control). This position has taken many different forms in the history of philosophy and psychology (for overviews, see Mandik 2005; Chemero 2011; Creem&#8208;Regehr &amp; Kunz 2010; Nanay 2013; Drayson 2017; Springle &amp; Machamer 2016; Grush &amp; Springle 2019; and Ferretti 2021). Most action-based theories of perception in the last 300 years, however, have looked to action in order to explain how vision, in particular, acquires either all or some of its spatial representational content . Accordingly, these are the theories on which we shall focus here. This entry is historically structured. We begin in Section 1 by discussing George Berkeley&rsquo;s Towards a New Theory of Vision (1709), the historical locus classicus of action-based theories of perception, and one of the most influential texts on vision ever written. Berkeley argues that the basic or &ldquo;proper&rdquo; deliverance of vision is not an arrangement of voluminous objects in three-dimensional space, but rather a two-dimensional manifold of light and color. We then turn to a discussion of Lotze, Helmholtz, and the local sign doctrine. The &ldquo;local signs&rdquo; were felt cues for the mind to know what sort of spatial content to imbue visual experience with. For Lotze, these cues were &ldquo;inflowing&rdquo; kinaesthetic feelings that result from actually moving the eyes, while, for Helmholtz, they were &ldquo;outflowing&rdquo; motor commands sent to move the eyes. In Section 2, we discuss sensorimotor contingency theories, which became prominent in the latter half of the 20 th century. These views maintain that an ability to predict the sensory consequences of self-initiated actions is necessary for perception. Among the motivations for this family of theories is the problem of visual direction constancy &mdash;why do objects appear to be stationary even though the locations on the retina to which they reflect light change with every eye movement?&mdash;as well as experiments on adaptation to optical rearrangement devices (ORDs) and sensory substitution. Section 3 examines two other important 20 th century theories. According to what we shall call the motor component theory , efference copies generated in the oculomotor system and/or proprioceptive feedback from eye-movements are used together with incoming sensory inputs to determine the spatial attributes of perceived objects. Efferent readiness theories , by contrast, look to the particular ways in which perceptual states prepare the observer to move and act in relation to the environment. The modest readiness theory , as we shall call it, claims that the way an object&rsquo;s spatial attributes are represented in visual experience can be modulated by one or another form of covert action planning. The bold readiness theory argues for the stronger claim that perception just is covert readiness for action. In Section 4, we move to the disposition theory , most influentially articulated by Gareth Evans (1982, 1985), but more recently defended by Rick Grush (2000, 2007). Evans&rsquo; theory is, at its core, very similar to the bold efferent readiness theory. There are some notable differences, though. Evans&rsquo; account is more finely articulated in some philosophical respects. It also does not posit a reduction of perception to behavioral dispositions, but rather posits that certain complicated relations between perceptual input and behavioral provide spatial content. Grush proposes a very specific theory that is like Evans&rsquo; in that it does not posit a reduction, but unlike Evans&rsquo; view, does not put behavioral dispositions and sensory input on an undifferentiated footing. 1. Early Action-Based Theories 1.1 Movement and Touch in the New Theory Of Vision 1.2 Objections to Berkeley&rsquo;s Theory 1.3 Lotze, Helmholtz, and the Local Sign Doctrine 2. Sensorimotor Contingency Theories 2.1 Efference and Visual Direction Constancy 2.1.1 Objections to the Efference Copy Theory 2.1.2 Alternatives to the Efference Copy Theory 2.2 The Reafference Theory 2.2.1 Held&rsquo;s Experiments On Prism Adaptation 2.2.2 Challenges to the Reafference Theory 2.3 The Enactive Approach 2.3.1 Evidence for the Enactive Approach 2.3.2 Challenges to the Enactive Approach 3. Motor Component and Efferent Readiness Theories 3.1 The Motor Component Theory (Embodied Visual Perception) 3.2 The Efferent Readiness Theory 3.2.1 The Modest Readiness Theory 3.2.2 The Bold Readiness Theory 4. Skill/Disposition Theories Bibliography Academic Tools Other Internet Resources Related Entries 1. Early Action-Based Theories Two doctrines dominate philosophical and psychological discussions of the relationship between action and space perception from the 18 th to the early 20 th century. The first is that the immediate objects of sight are two-dimensional manifolds of light and color, lacking perceptible extension in depth. The second is that vision must be &ldquo;educated&rdquo; by the sense of touch&mdash;understood as including both kinaesthesis and proprioceptive position sense&mdash;if the former is to acquire its apparent outward, three-dimensional spatial significance. The relevant learning process is associationist: normal vision results when tangible ideas of distance (derived from experiences of unimpeded movement) and solid shape (derived from experiences of contact and differential resistance) are elicited by the visible ideas of light and color with which they have been habitually associated. The widespread acceptance of both doctrines owes much to the influence of George Berkeley&rsquo;s New Theory of Vision (1709). The Berkeleyan approach looks to action in order to explain how depth is &ldquo;added&rdquo; to a phenomenally two-dimensional visual field. The spatial ordering of the visual field itself, however, is taken to be immediately given in experience (Hatfield &amp; Epstein 1979; Falkenstein 1994; but see Grush 2007). Starting in the 19 th century, a number of theorists, including Johann Steinbuch (1770&ndash;1818), Hermann Lotze (1817&ndash;1881), Hermann von Helmholtz (1821&ndash;1894), Wilhelm Wundt (1832&ndash;1920), and Ernst Mach (1838&ndash;1916), argued that all abilities for visual spatial localization, including representation of up/down and left/right direction within the two-dimensional visual field, depend on motor factors, in particular, gaze-directing movements of the eye (Hatfield 1990: chaps. 4&ndash;5). This idea is the basis of the &ldquo;local sign&rdquo; doctrine, which we examine in Section 2.3 . 1.1 Movement and Touch in the New Theory Of Vision There are three principal respects in which motor action is central to Berkeley&rsquo;s project in the New Theory of Vision (1709). First, Berkeley argues that visual experiences convey information about three-dimensional space only to the extent that they enable perceivers to anticipate the tactile consequences of actions directed at surrounding objects. In &sect;45 of the New Theory, Berkeley writes: &hellip;I say, neither distance, nor things placed at a distance are themselves, or their ideas, truly perceived by sight&hellip;. whoever will look narrowly into his own thoughts, and examine what he means by saying, he sees this or that thing at a distance, will agree with me, that what he sees only suggests to his understanding, that after having passed a certain distance, to be measured by the motion of his body, which is perceivable by touch, he shall come to perceive such and such tangible ideas which have been usually connected with such and such visible ideas. And later in the Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1734: &sect;44): &hellip;in strict truth the ideas of sight, when we apprehend by them distance and things placed at a distance, do not suggest or mark out to us things actually existing at a distance, but only admonish us what ideas of touch will be imprinted in our minds at such and such distances of time, and in consequence of such or such actions. &hellip;[V]isible ideas are the language whereby the governing spirit &hellip; informs us what tangible ideas he is about to imprint upon us, in case we excite this or that motion in our own bodies. The view Berkeley defends in these passages has recognizable antecedents in Locke&rsquo;s Essay Concerning Human Understanding (1690: Book II, Chap. 9, &sect;&sect;8&ndash;10). There Locke maintained that the immediate objects of sight are &ldquo;flat&rdquo; or lack outward depth; that sight must be coordinated with touch in order to mediate judgments concerning the disposition of objects in three-dimensional space; and that visible ideas &ldquo;excite&rdquo; in the mind movement-based ideas of distance through an associative process akin to that whereby words suggest their meanings: the process is &ldquo;performed so constantly, and so quick, that we take that for the perception of our sensation, which is an idea formed by our judgment.&rdquo; A long line of philosophers&mdash;including Condillac (1754), Reid (1785), Smith (1811), Mill (1842, 1843), Bain (1855, 1868), and Dewey (1891)&mdash;accepted this view of the relation between sight and touch. The second respect in which action plays a prominent role in the New Theory is teleological. Sight not only derives its three-dimensional spatial significance from bodily movement, its purpose is to help us engage in such movement adaptively : &hellip;the proper objects of vision constitute an universal language of the Author of nature, whereby we are instructed how to regulate our actions, in order to attain those things, that are necessary to the preservation and well-being of our bodies, as also to avoid whatever may be hurtful and destructive of them. It is by their information that we are principally guided in all the transactions and concerns of life. (1709: &sect;147) Although Berkeley does not explain how vision instructs us in regulating our actions, the answer is reasonably clear from the preceding account of depth perception: seeing an object or scene can elicit tangible ideas that directly motivate self-preserving action. The tactual ideas associated with a rapidly looming ball in the visual field, for example, can directly motivate the subject to shift position defensively or to catch it before being struck. (For recent versions and critical assessments of the view that perception of the environment&rsquo;s spatial layout is systematically sensitive to the subject&rsquo;s abilities and goals for action, see Proffitt 2006, 2008; Bennett 2011; Firestone 2013; and Siegel 2014). The third respect in which action is central to the New Theory is psychological. Tangible ideas of distance are elicited not only by (1) visual or &ldquo;pictorial&rdquo; depth cues such as object&rsquo;s degree of blurriness (objects appear increasingly &ldquo;confused&rdquo; as they approach the observer), but also by kinaesthetic, muscular sensations resulting from (2) changes in the vergence angle of the eyes (1709: &sect;16) and (3) accommodation of the lens (1709: &sect;27). Like many contemporary theories of spatial vision, the Berkeleyan account thus acknowledges an important role for oculomotor factors in our perception of distance. 1.2 Objections to Berkeley&rsquo;s Theory Critics of Berkeley&rsquo;s theory in the 18 th and 19 th centuries (for reviews, see Bain 1868; Smith 2000; Atherton 2005) principally targeted three claims: (a) that &ldquo;distance, of it self and immediately, cannot be seen&rdquo; (Berkeley 1709: &sect;1); (b) that sight depends on learned connections with experiences of movement and touch for its outward, spatial significance; and (c) that &ldquo;habitual connexion&rdquo;, i.e., association, would by itself enable touch to &ldquo;educate&rdquo; vision in the manner required by (b). Most philosophers and perceptual psychologists now concur with Armstrong&rsquo;s (1960) assessment that the &ldquo;single point&rdquo; argument for claim (a)&mdash;&ldquo;distance being a line directed end-wise to the eye, it projects only one point in the fund of the eye, which point remains invariably the same, whether the distance be longer or shorter&rdquo; (Berkeley 1709: &sect;2)&mdash;conflates spatial properties of the retinal image with those of the objects of sight (also see Condillac 1746/2001: 102; Abbott 1864: chap. 1). In contrast with claim (a), we should note, both contemporary &ldquo;ecological&rdquo; and information-processing approaches in vision science assume that the spatial representational contents of visual experience are robustly three-dimensional: vision is no less a distance sense than touch. Three sorts of objections targeted on claim (b) were prominent. First, it is not evident to introspection that visual experiences reliably elicit tactile and kinaesthetic images as Berkeley suggests. As Bain succinctly formulates this objection: In perceiving distance, we are not conscious of tactual feelings or locomotive reminiscences; what we see is a visible quality, and nothing more. (1868: 194) Second, sight is often the refractory party when conflicts with touch arise. Consider the experience of seeing a three-dimensional scene in a painting: &ldquo;I know, without any doubt&rdquo;, writes Condillac, that it is painted on a flat surface; I have touched it, and yet this knowledge, repeated experience, and all the judgments I can make do not prevent me from seeing convex figures. Why does this appearance persist? (1746/2001: I, &sect;6, 3) Last, vision in many animals does not need tutoring by touch before it is able to guide spatially directed movement and action. Cases in which non-human neonates respond adaptively to the distal sources of visual stimulation imply that external objects are seen to be so&hellip;. They prove, at least, the possibility that the opening of the eye may be at once followed by the perception of external objects as such, or, in other words, by the perception or sensation of outness. (Bailey 1842: 30; for replies, see Smith 1811: 385&ndash;390) Here it would be in principle possible for a proponent of Berkeley&rsquo;s position to maintain that, at least for such animals, the connection between visual ideas and ideas of touch is innate and not learned (see Stewart 1829: 241&ndash;243; Mill 1842: 106&ndash;110). While this would abandon Berkeley&rsquo;s empiricism and associationism, it would maintain the claim that vision provides depth information only because its ideas are connected to tangible ideas. Regarding claim (c), many critics denied that the supposed &ldquo;habitual connexion&rdquo; between vision and touch actually obtains. Suppose that the novice perceiver sees a remote tree at time 1 and walks in its direction until she makes contact with it at time 2 . The problem is that the perceiver&rsquo;s initial visual experience of the tree at time 1 is not temporally contiguous with the locomotion-based experience of the tree&rsquo;s distance completed at time 2 . Indeed, at time 2 the former experience no longer exists. &ldquo;The association required&rdquo;, Abbott thus writes, cannot take place, for the simple reason that the ideas to be associated cannot co-exist. We cannot at one and the same moment be looking at an object five, ten, fifty yards off, and be achieving our last step towards it. (1864: 24) Finally, findings from perceptual psychology have more recently been leveled against the view that vision is educated by touch. Numerous studies of how subjects respond to lens-, mirror-, and prism-induced distortions of visual experience (Gibson 1933; Harris 1965, 1980; Hay et al. 1965; Rock &amp; Harris 1967) indicate that not only is sight resistant to correction from touch, it will often dominate or &ldquo;capture&rdquo; the latter when intermodal conflicts arise. This point will be discussed in greater depth in Section 3 below. 1.3 Lotze, Helmholtz, and the Local Sign Doctrine Like Berkeley, Hermann Lotze (1817&ndash;1881) and Hermann von Helmholtz (1821&ndash;1894) affirm the role played by active movement and touch in the genesis of three-dimensional visuospatial awareness: &hellip;there can be no possible sense in speaking of any other truth of our perceptions other than practical truth. Our perceptions of things cannot be anything other than symbols, naturally given signs for things, which we have learned to use in order to control our motions and actions. When we have learned to read those signs in the proper manner, we are in a condition to use them to orient our actions such that they achieve their intended effect; that is to say, that new sensations arise in an expected manner (Helmholtz 2005 [1924]: 19, our emphasis). Lotze and Helmholtz go further than Berkeley in maintaining that bodily movement also plays a role in the construction of the two-dimensional visual field, taken for granted by most previous accounts of vision (but for exceptions, see Hatfield 1990: ch. 4). The problem of two-dimensional spatial localization, as Lotze and Helmholtz understand it, is the problem of assigning a unique, eye-relative (or &ldquo;oculocentric&rdquo;) direction to every point in the visual field. Lotze&rsquo;s commitment to mind-body dualism precluded looking to any physical or anatomical spatial ordering in the visual system for a solution to this problem (Lotze 1887 [1879]: &sect;&sect;276&ndash;77). Rather, Lotze maintains that every discrete visual impression is attended by a &ldquo;special extra sensation&rdquo; whose phenomenal character varies as a function of its origin on the retina. Collectively, these extra sensations or &ldquo;local signs&rdquo; constitute a &ldquo;system of graduated, qualitative tokens&rdquo; (1887 [1879]: &sect;283) that bridge the gap between the spatial structure of the nonconscious retinal image and the spatial structure represented in conscious visual awareness. What sort of sensation, however, is suited to play the individuating role attributed to a local sign? Lotze appeals to kinaesthetic sensations that accompany gaze-directing movements of the eyes (1887 [1879]: &sect;&sect;284&ndash;86). If P is the location on the retina stimulated by a distal point d and F is the fovea, then PF is the arc that must be traversed in order to align the direction of gaze with d . As the eye moves through arc PF , its changing position gives rise to a corresponding series of kinaesthetic sensations p 0 , p 1 , p 2 , &hellip; p n , and it is this consciously experienced series, unique to P , that constitutes P&rsquo;s local sign. By contrast, if Q were rather the location on the retina stimulated by d , then the eye&rsquo;s foveating movement through arc QF would elicit a different series of kinaesthetic sensations k 0 , k 1 , k 2 , &hellip; k n unique to Q . Importantly, Lotze allows that retinal stimulation need not trigger an overt movement of the eye. Rather, even in the absence of the corresponding saccade, stimulating point P will elicit kinaesthetic sensation p 0 , and this sensation will, in turn, recall from memory the rest of the series with which it is associated p 1 , &hellip; p n . Accordingly, though there is no movement of the eye, there arises the recollection of something, greater or smaller, that must be accomplished if the stimuli at P and Q , which arouse only a weak sensation, are to arouse sensations of the highest degree of strength and clearness. (1887 [1879]: &sect;285) In this way, Lotze accounts for our ability to perceive multiple locations in the visual field at the same time. Helmholtz 2005 [1924] fully accepts the need for local signs in two-dimensional spatial localization, but makes an important modification to Lotze&rsquo;s theory. In particular, he maintains that local signs are not feelings that originate in the adjustment of the ocular musculature, i.e., a form of afferent, sensory &ldquo;inflow&rdquo; from the eyes, but rather feelings of innervation ( Innervationsgef&uuml;hlen ) produced by the effort of the will ( Willensanstrengung ) to move the eyes, i.e., a form of efferent, motor &ldquo;outflow&rdquo;. In general, to each perceptible location in the visual field there is an associated readiness or impulse of the will ( Willensimpuls ) to move eyes in the manner required in order to fixate it. As Ernst Mach later formulates Helmholtz&rsquo;s view: &ldquo;The will to perform movements of the eyes, or the innervation to the act, is itself the space sensation&rdquo; (Mach 1897 [1886]: 59). Helmholtz favored a motor outflow version of the local sign doctrine for two main reasons. First, he was skeptical that afferent registrations of eye position are precise enough to play the role assigned to them by Lotze&rsquo;s theory (2005 [1924]: 47&ndash;49). Recent research has shown that proprioceptive inflow from ocular muscular stretch receptors does in fact play a quantifiable role in estimating direction of gaze, but efferent outflow is normally the more heavily weighted source of information (Bridgeman 2010; see Section 2.1.1 below). Second, attempting a saccade when the eyes are paralyzed or otherwise immobilized results in an apparent shift of the visual scene in the same direction (Helmholtz 2005 [1924]: 205&ndash;06; Mach 1897 [1886]: 59&ndash;60). This finding would make sense if efferent signals to the eye are used to determine the direction of gaze: the visual system &ldquo;infers&rdquo; that perceived objects are moving because they would have to be in order for retinal stimulation to remain constant despite the change in eye direction predicted on the basis of motor outflow. Although Helmholtz was primarily concerned to show that &ldquo;our judgments as to the direction of the visual axis are simply the result of the effort of will involved in trying to alter the adjustment of the eyes&rd