--> Empirical Approaches to Altruism (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy) Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Menu Browse Table of Contents What's New Random Entry Chronological Archives About Editorial Information About the SEP Editorial Board How to Cite the SEP Special Characters Advanced Tools Contact Support SEP Support the SEP PDFs for SEP Friends Make a Donation SEPIA for Libraries Entry Navigation Entry Contents Bibliography Academic Tools Friends PDF Preview Author and Citation Info Back to Top Empirical Approaches to Altruism First published Mon Jan 6, 2020; substantive revision Mon Mar 31, 2025 Many philosophers, along with some biologists and social scientists, have maintained that altruism is a crucial component of morality, and that people often do behave altruistically. Other philosophers, along with some biologists and social scientists, have claimed that facts about human psychology, or about the evolutionary processes that have shaped human psychology, indicate that no human behavior is genuinely altruistic. Part of this disagreement can be traced to the fact that both philosophers and scientists use the term &ldquo;altruism&rdquo; with many quite different meanings. In order to clarify this conceptual variety, Sections 2 and 3 canvas competing philosophical accounts of altruism. Sections 4 and 5 review some of the most important empirical work aimed at determining whether humans can indeed behave altruistically &mdash; according to the &ldquo;standard&rdquo; philosophical account of how altruism is understood. Section 6 explores the possibility that both egoism and altruism might be mistaken. Section 7 takes a brief look at how recent work in developmental and comparative psychology might provide support for the existence of altruism. Section 1 begins the discussion by describing some purported ethical implications of different positions in the egoism-altruism debate. 1. Some Philosophical Background 2. Defining &ldquo;Egoism&rdquo; and &ldquo;Altruism&rdquo;&mdash;The Standard Account 3. Altruism and Evolution 4. Altruism in the Social Sciences 5. The Egoism vs. Altruism Debate in Psychology 5.1 The Social Punishment Hypothesis 5.2 The Aversive-Arousal Reduction Hypothesis 5.3 The Challenge Posed by &ldquo;Self-Other Merging&rdquo; 5.4 Have Batson&rsquo;s Studies Made a Convincing Case for the Existence of Altruism in Humans? 6. Beyond Egoism vs. Altruism 7. Developmental and Comparative Psychology 8. The Bottom Line Bibliography Academic Tools Other Internet Resources Related Entries 1. Some Philosophical Background People often behave in ways that benefit others, and they sometimes do this knowing that it will be costly, unpleasant or dangerous. But at least since Plato&rsquo;s classic discussion in the second Book of the Republic , debate has raged over why people behave in this way. Are their motives really altruistic, or is their behavior ultimately motivated by self-interest? Famously, Hobbes gave this answer: No man giveth but with intention of good to himself, because gift is voluntary; and of all voluntary acts, the object is to every man his own good; of which, if men see they shall be frustrated, there will be no beginning of benevolence or trust, nor consequently of mutual help. (1651 [1981]: Ch. 15) Views like Hobbes&rsquo; have come to be called egoism , [ 1 ] and this rather depressing conception of human motivation has apparently been favored, in one form or another, by a number of eminent philosophical advocates, including Bentham, J.S. Mill and Nietzsche. Egoism was also arguably the dominant view about human motivation in the social sciences for much of the twentieth century (Piliavin &amp; Charng 1990: 28; Grant 1997). Dissenting voices, though perhaps fewer in number, have been no less eminent. Butler, Hume, Rousseau, and Adam Smith have all argued that, sometimes at least, human motivation is genuinely altruistic. [ 2 ] Though the issue dividing egoistic and altruistic accounts of human motivation is largely empirical, it is easy to see why philosophers have thought that the competing answers will have important consequences for moral theory. For example, Kant famously argued that a person should act &ldquo;not from inclination but from duty, and by this would his conduct first acquire true moral worth&rdquo; (1785 [1949]: Sec. 1, parag. 12). But egoism maintains that all human motivation is ultimately self-interested, and thus people can&rsquo;t act &ldquo;from duty&rdquo; in the way that Kant urged. Thus if egoism is true, Kant&rsquo;s account would entail that no conduct has &ldquo;true moral worth&rdquo;. Additionally, if egoism is true, it would appear to impose a strong constraint on how a moral theory can answer the venerable question &ldquo;Why should I be moral?&rdquo; since, as Hobbes clearly saw, the answer will have to ground the motivation to be moral in the agent&rsquo;s self-interest. There are related implications for political philosophy. If the egoists are right, then the only way to motivate prosocial behavior is to give people a selfish reason for engaging in such behavior, and this constrains the design of political institutions intended to encourage civic-minded behavior. For example, John Stuart Mill, who was both a utilitarian and an egoist, advocated a variety of manipulative social interventions to engender conformity with utilitarian moral standards from egoistic moral agents. [ 3 ] It is easy to find philosophers suggesting that altruism is required for morality or that egoism is incompatible with morality&mdash;and easier still to find philosophers who claim that other philosophers think this. Here are a few examples culled from a standard reference work that happened to be close at hand: Moral behavior is, at the most general level, altruistic behavior, motivated by the desire to promote not only our own welfare but the welfare of others. (Rachels 2000: 81) [O]ne central assumption motivating ethical theory in the Analytic tradition is that the function of ethics is to combat the inherent egoism or selfishness of individuals. Indeed, many thinkers define the basic goal of morality as &ldquo;selflessness&rdquo; or &ldquo;altruism&rdquo;. (W. Schroeder 2000: 396) Philosophers since Socrates worried that humans might be capable of acting only to promote their own self-interest. But if that is all we can do, then it seems morality is impossible. (LaFollette 2000a: 5) [ 4 ] While the egoism/altruism debate has historically been of great philosophical interest, the issue centrally concerns psychological questions about the nature of human motivation, so it&rsquo;s no surprise that psychologists have done a great deal of empirical research aimed at determining which view is correct. The psychological literature will be center-stage in section 5, the longest section in this entry, and in section 7. But before considering that literature, it is important to be clear on what the debate is about. 2. Defining &ldquo;Egoism&rdquo; and &ldquo;Altruism&rdquo;&mdash;The Standard Account Providing definitions for &ldquo;egoism&rdquo; and &ldquo;altruism&rdquo; is a contentious matter, since these terms have been understood in radically different ways both in philosophy and in the biological and social sciences. In this entry the focus will be on the most widespread philosophical interpretation of &ldquo;egoism&rdquo; and &ldquo;altruism&rdquo;, where both are understood as descriptive claims about human psychology (as opposed to normative or prescriptive claims about what human beings ought to do or be). We&rsquo;ll call it &ldquo;the standard account&rdquo;, versions of which have been offered by numerous authors, including Broad (1950), Feinberg (1965 [1999]), Sober and Wilson (1998: Chs. 6 &amp; 7), Rachels (2003: Ch. 6), Joyce (2006: Ch. 1), Kitcher (2010, 2011: Ch. 1), May (2011a), and many others. Not surprisingly, there are minor differences among the accounts provided by these authors, and those differences occasionally provoke disagreement in the literature. But all of them bear a strong family resemblance to the one we&rsquo;re about to sketch. [ 5 ] At the end of this section, a different philosophical account of altruism is briefly discussed. Biological accounts of altruism will be considered in section 3. Accounts proposed by social scientists will be discussed in section 4. But our present focus is the standard philosophical account. As already intimated, while advocates of altruism and of egoism agree that people often help others, they disagree about why people do this. On the standard account, defenders of altruism insist that, sometimes at least, people are motivated by an ultimate desire for the well-being of another person, while defenders of egoism maintain that all ultimate desires are self-interested. This formulation invites questions about (1) what it is for a behavior to be motivated by an ultimate desire, and (2) the distinction between desires that are self-interested and desires for the well-being of others. The first question, regarding ultimate desires, can be usefully explicated with the help of a familiar account of practical reasoning. [ 6 ] On this account, practical reasoning is a causal process via which a desire and a belief give rise to or sustain another desire. For example, a desire to drink an espresso and a belief that the best place to get an espresso is at the espresso bar on Main Street may cause a desire to go to the espresso bar on Main Street. This desire can then join forces with another belief to generate a third desire, and so on. Sometimes this process will lead to a desire to perform a relatively simple or &ldquo;basic&rdquo; action, and that desire, in turn, will cause the agent to perform the basic action without the intervention of any further desires. Desires produced or sustained by this process of practical reasoning are instrumental desires&mdash;the agent has them because she thinks that satisfying them will lead to something else that she desires. But not all desires can be instrumental desires. If we are to avoid circularity or an infinite regress there must be some desires that are not produced because the agent thinks that satisfying them will facilitate satisfying some other desire. These desires that are not produced or sustained by practical reasoning are the agent&rsquo;s ultimate desires, and the objects of ultimate desires&mdash;the states of affairs desired&mdash;are often said to be desired &ldquo;for their own sake&rdquo;. A behavior is motivated by a specific ultimate desire when that desire is part of the practical reasoning process that leads to the behavior. Although the second question, about the distinction between self-interested desires and desires for the well-being of others, would require an extended discussion in any comprehensive treatment of the debate between egoists and altruists, some rough and ready examples of the distinction will suffice here. [ 7 ] The desires that another person&rsquo;s life be saved, that another person&rsquo;s suffering be alleviated, or that another person be happy are paradigm cases of desires for the well-being of others, while desires to experience pleasure, get rich, and become famous are typical examples of self-interested desires. The self-interested desires to experience pleasure and to avoid pain have played an especially prominent role in the debate, since one version of egoism, often called hedonism, maintains that these are our only ultimate desires. Stich et al. (2010) maintain that some desires, like the desire that I myself be the one to alleviate my friend&rsquo;s suffering, are hard to classify, and conclude that both egoism and altruism are best viewed as somewhat vague. [ 8 ] Whether or not this is correct, it is clear that there are many desires that are neither self-interested nor desires for the well-being of others. One of the earliest examples was provided by Bishop Joseph Butler (1726 [1887]) who noted that revenge often engenders malevolent desires, like the desire that another person be harmed, which are obviously not desires for the well-being of the that person, and are not self-interested either. [ 9 ] Other examples include the desire that great works of art be preserved and the desire that space exploration be pursued. More interesting for moral theory are the desire to do one&rsquo;s moral duty, and the desire to obey God&rsquo;s commandments. If people have ultimate desires like these, then egoism is false. But, of course, the existence of ultimate desires like these would not show that altruism is true, since such desires are not readily understood as desires for the well-being of others. The take-away from such cases is that on the standard account, egoism and altruism might both be mistaken. Though interpretations of &ldquo;altruism&rdquo; that approximate the standard account predominate in the philosophical literature, some philosophers use the term in a very different way. A paper by Thomas Schramme (2017) provides a clear example. [A]ltruism need not be reduced to its opposition to egoism. In this chapter, altruism is discussed as a psychological basis for moral conduct more generally, not just in terms of motivations to benefit others. Here altruism stands for the capacity to take the moral point of view and be disposed to act accordingly&hellip;. Seen in this way, altruism is a short word for the psychological phenomenon of the internalized pull of morality&hellip; (2017: 203&ndash;204). Altruism is then basically identical with taking the moral point of view, i.e., an individual appreciation of the normative force of morality. (2017: 209). [ 10 ] Schramme is, of course, aware that many authors reject &ldquo;such a close connection of general moral motivation and altruistic motivation&rdquo; but he maintains that this account of altruism &ldquo;can certainly be found in the philosophical debate&rdquo; (2017: 209). Much the same claim is made by Badhwar (1993: 90): In the moral philosophy of the last two centuries, altruism of one kind or another has typically been regarded as identical with moral concern. Schramme is surely right that [t]he fact that we can understand altruism both as referring to moral behavior quite generally and as restricted to a more specific set of helping behaviors may lead to confusion. (2017: 204) Though some philosophers may believe there is a substantive dispute about which account of altruism is correct, others may think that the issue is purely terminological. 3. Altruism and Evolution Readers familiar with some of the popular literature on the evolution of morality that has appeared in the last few decades might suspect that recent work in evolutionary biology has resolved the debate between egoists and altruists. For some readers&mdash;and some writers&mdash;seem to interpret evolutionary theory as showing that altruism is biologically impossible. If altruistic organisms were somehow to emerge, this literature sometimes suggests, they would lose the competition for survival and reproduction to their selfish conspecifics, and they would quickly become extinct. On this view, any appearance of altruism is simply an illusion. In the memorable words of biologist Michael Ghiselin (1974: 247) &ldquo;Scratch an &lsquo;altruist&rsquo; and watch a &lsquo;hypocrite&rsquo; bleed&rdquo;. But as Sober and Wilson (1998) have argued with great clarity, there is no simple connection between evolutionary theory and the philosophical debate between egoism and altruism. This is because the concept of altruism that is important in evolutionary theory is quite different from the standard concept of altruism invoked in the philosophical debate. For biologists, an organism behaves altruistically if and only if the behavior in question reduces its own fitness while increasing the fitness of one or more other organisms. Roughly speaking, an organism&rsquo;s fitness is a measure of how many descendants it will have. [ 11 ] As Sober and Wilson note, on this evolutionary account of altruism, an organism can be altruistic even if it does not have a mind capable of having beliefs and desires, which of course entails that it cannot have the ultimate desires for the well-being of others that are characteristic of altruism on the standard philosophical account. Thus there can be no easy inference from biological altruism to psychological altruism. Nor does the inference go in the opposite direction. To make the point, Sober and Wilson (Ch. 10) note that natural selection might well equip humans or other psychologically sophisticated organisms with ultimate desires to foster the welfare of their offspring under certain circumstances. Organisms with these ultimate desires would be psychological altruists, though the behavior that the desires gave rise to would typically not be evolutionarily altruistic, since by helping their offspring organisms typically are increasing their own fitness. So, contrary to the presumption that evolutionary biology has resolved the debate between egoists and altruists in favor of egoism, it appears that evolutionary theory leaves key questions open. [ 12 ] That said, some authors have recently argued that there are important connections between the biological accounts of altruism and the traditional accounts sketched in the previous section. In particular, Piccinini and Schulz (2019) argue that the standard account of altruism sketched in Section 2 should be expanded by considering how desires are produced. Several different desire-production mechanisms can be distinguished, including innate dispositions, learning, and instrumental reasoning; drawing on a biological account of altruism like that sketched in this section, Piccinini and Schulz argue that some of these mechanisms deserve to be called egoistic, even if they lead to ultimate desires for the well-being of others. [ 13 ] Piccinini and Schulz see egoistically produced desires as those that are produced by evolutionarily selfish mechanisms&mdash;i.e. by mechanisms that were selected for increasing their bearer&rsquo;s own fitness only, as opposed to that of other organisms. They further argue that a key example of these egoistically produced desires are ones that an organism has learned through some kind of reward-based learning process. Such reward-based learning processes are evolutionarily ancient and phylogenetically extremely widespread&mdash;e.g., they can be found in sea slugs (Kandel 2001). Importantly, reward-based learning processes can target many different things beyond behaviors, and can also lead to the acquisition of desires . Piccinini and Schulz see altruistically produced desires as those produced by mechanisms that are evolutionarily altruistic. Key among these are innate desires to increase the well-being of unrelated others (such as ingroup members). (These other organisms need not even be conspecifics: I might be motivated to increase the well-being of a stray cat I find at the side of the road.) Finally, they characterize neutrally produced desires as those desires that are not produced by either egoistic or altruistic processes. Key among these are unselected desires, such as those that are accidentally produced. Distinguishing these different ways of producing desires can be combined with the prior distinction among desires with different contents to yield a two-dimensional framework of altruisms: there is a &ldquo;classical&rdquo; form of altruism, which concerns desires for the well-being of others that have been produced by evolutionary altruistic (or at least neutral) mechanisms. Similarly, there is a &ldquo;non-classical&rdquo; form of altruism, which concerns desires for the well-being of others that have been produced by evolutionary selfish mechanisms. Note that what this framework terms &ldquo; classical altruism &rdquo; is not the same as the standard account laid out in section 2. This is due to the fact that the standard account does not consider the source of the ultimate desires to increase others&rsquo; well-being, and thus cannot make the distinctions laid out in table 1. Still, Piccinini and Schulz think that &ldquo;classical altruism&rdquo; also captures the spirit of the classical discussions of altruism in the philosophical and psychological literature (hence the name), much like the standard account does. On both accounts, altruism is seen as a motivational structure untainted by egoism. Whether a desire to increase someone else&rsquo;s well-being has been selected for in an evolutionary altruistic manner (i.e. despite not increasing its bearer&rsquo;s direct fitness) or whether it arose accidentally (as an unselected by-product of other motivational structures, say), it is free from an &ldquo;egoistic taint&rdquo; and deserves to be called altruistic. This conforms to the standard account&rsquo;s observation that altruism is not just about having desires for increasing another&rsquo;s well-being&mdash;it is about having desires for increasing another&rsquo;s well-being that are not somehow &ldquo;based on&rdquo; selfish desires. This framework makes clear that there is a form of altruism that concerns desires that are still altruistic in content&mdash;i.e. they are for increasing another&rsquo;s well-being&mdash;but which are still derived from mechanisms that are evolutionarily selfish. For example, the derivation of a desire to increase another&rsquo;s well-being from a desire to increase one&rsquo;s own well-being, is plausibly thought to be a basic part of adaptive decision-making in general (see also Schulz, 2018), and thus is likely to be selected just for increasing an organism&rsquo;s own direct fitness. Piccinini and Schulz&rsquo;s approach counts such instrumental, derived desires for increasing another&rsquo;s well-being to count as altruistic &mdash;albeit only non-classically so. This does not exhaust the kinds of desires that are seen as non-classically altruistic; indeed, even some of the desires that the standard account would consider to be properly altruistic will end up turning out to be only non-classically so in the framework of table 1. In particular, even ultimate desires for increasing another&rsquo;s well-being will be classified as only non-classically altruistic, if these desires are the product of a reward-learning mechanism. If an organism has been rewarded for having ultimate desires for increasing another&rsquo;s well-being, then that is not a desire that is &ldquo;untainted by egoism&rdquo; since the organism only has that desire because it itself benefited from it. If Piccinini and Schulz&rsquo;s framework is accepted, the fact that many of our other-regarding (ultimate) desires may have a selfish source &mdash;for example, because we have been rewarded for having them&mdash;does not make the associated behavior non-altruistic. It is true that there is a &ldquo;taint&rdquo; of egoism in altruistic behaviors with such etiologies; however, Piccinini and Schulz argue that this should still be considered altruistic overall (though &ldquo;non-classically&rdquo; so). It&rsquo;s at least arguable that this latter, less stringent, standard for altruism connects with much of what has been at issue in the egoism-altruism debate&mdash;indeed, see below in section 6 for some empirical work that matches their framework well. At any rate, whether or not Piccinini and Schulz&rsquo;s framework is right about this, it is at least clear that evolutionary biology may have more to offer to the debate surrounding psychological altruism than it may at first appear. This is likely to continue to be an important question for further investigation. 4. Altruism in the Social Sciences In recent decades there has been an enormous amount of discussion of altruism in psychology, sociology, economics, anthropology, and primatology. Much of the work in psychology, including much of the work r