Quantum Physics I | Physics | MIT OpenCourseWare Browse Course Material Syllabus Calendar Lecture Notes Video Lectures Basic Concepts Quantum Physics in One-dimensional Potentials One-dimensional Scattering, Angular Momentum &amp; Central Potentials Assignments Exams Course Info Instructor Prof. Barton Zwiebach Departments Physics As Taught In Spring 2016 Level Undergraduate Topics Science Physics Quantum Mechanics Learning Resource Types grading Exams notes Lecture Notes theaters Lecture Videos assignment Problem Sets Download Course menu search Give Now About OCW Help &amp; Faqs Contact Us search GIVE NOW about ocw help &amp; faqs contact us 8.04 | Spring 2016 | Undergraduate Quantum Physics I Menu Syllabus Calendar Lecture Notes Video Lectures Basic Concepts Quantum Physics in One-dimensional Potentials One-dimensional Scattering, Angular Momentum &amp; Central Potentials Assignments Exams Course Description This is the first course in the undergraduate Quantum Physics sequence. It introduces the basic features of quantum mechanics. It covers the experimental basis of quantum physics, introduces wave mechanics, Schrödinger&rsquo;s equation in a single dimension, and Schrödinger&rsquo;s equation in three dimensions. The … Show more This is the first course in the undergraduate Quantum Physics sequence. It introduces the basic features of quantum mechanics. It covers the experimental basis of quantum physics, introduces wave mechanics, Schrödinger&rsquo;s equation in a single dimension, and Schrödinger&rsquo;s equation in three dimensions. The lectures and lecture notes for this course form the basis of Zwiebach’s textbook Mastering Quantum Mechanics published by MIT Press in April 2022. This presentation of 8.04 by Barton Zwiebach (2016) differs somewhat and complements nicely the presentation of Allan Adams (2013) . Adams covers a larger set of ideas; Zwiebach tends to go deeper into a smaller set of ideas, offering a systematic and detailed treatment. Adams begins with the subtleties of superpostion, while Zwiebach discusses the surprises of interaction-free measurements. While both courses overlap over a sizable amount of standard material, Adams discussed applications to condensed matter physics, while Zwiebach focused on scattering and resonances. The different perspectives of the instructors make the problem sets in the two courses rather different. Show less Course Info Instructor Prof. Barton Zwiebach Departments Physics Topics Science Physics Quantum Mechanics Learning Resource Types grading Exams notes Lecture Notes theaters Lecture Videos assignment Problem Sets A Mach-Zehnder interferometer, with two beam splitters, two mirrors, and two detectors, is used to test if an Elitzur-Vaidman bomb is functional without detonating it. (Image by MIT OpenCourseWare.) Download Course Over 2,500 courses & materials Freely sharing knowledge with learners and educators around the world. Learn more © 2001–2026 Massachusetts Institute of Technology Accessibility Creative Commons License Terms and Conditions Proud member of: © 2001–2026 Massachusetts Institute of Technology You are leaving MIT OpenCourseWare close Please be advised that external sites may have terms and conditions, including license rights, that differ from ours. MIT OCW is not responsible for any content on third party sites, nor does a link suggest an endorsement of those sites and/or their content. Stay Here Continue