Document Tracking Software &amp; Analytics | HubSpot Logo - Full (Color) Skip to content English Select a language 日本語 Deutsch English Español Português Français High Contrast Customer Support Contact Sales Close Search Log in About About About Us Careers Contact Us Investor Relations Management Team Back Menu Close Search Products Products The HubSpot Customer Platform All of HubSpot's marketing, sales, and customer service software on one agentic platform. Free HubSpot CRM Overview of all products Marketing Hub Marketing automation software Free and premium plans Sales Hub Sales software Free and premium plans Service Hub Customer service software Free and premium plans Content Hub Content marketing software Free and premium plans Data Hub Data management software Free and premium plans Commerce Hub CPQ, billing, and payments software Free and premium plans Smart CRM AI-powered, flexible CRM software Learn more Small Business Bundle The Starter edition of each product, built for startups and small businesses Learn more Breeze AI agents and features that power the entire platform Learn more AEO (Beta) Answer engine optimization tools that track and improve your brand's visibility in AI results Learn more HubSpot Marketplace Connect your favorite apps to HubSpot See all integrations Solutions Solutions By Use Case By Team Size Why HubSpot? Marketing Generate leads Convert visitors into contacts for your database. Automate marketing Create campaigns with automation and AI. Sales Build pipeline Generate a pipeline of high-quality prospects. Close deals Streamline your process and close more deals faster. Customer Service Scale support Support customers at scale with AI and a help desk. Drive retention Identify opportunities to improve customer health. Content Create content Easily craft content for your audience, with help from AI. Manage content Organize, update, and distribute content in one place. Startups &amp; Small Businesses Find and reach customers Generate leads through content, AI, and automation. Grow sales and get paid Prospect smarter and automate payments. Organize customer data Unify your team and data on one platform. Artificial Intelligence Resolve customer queries 24/7 Scale customer service with an AI customer agent. Automate sales prospecting Identify and engage high-value leads with an AI prospecting agent. Research customers faster Get instant answers about your customers with an AI data agent. By Team Size For Small Businesses &amp; Startups HubSpot’s all-in-one Starter Customer Platform helps your growing startup or small business find and win customers from day one. Learn more about HubSpot’s Starter Customer Platform For Enterprises With HubSpot’s integrated Enterprise Customer Platform, you don’t have to sacrifice power for ease of use. Learn more about HubSpot’s Enterprise Customer Platform Why HubSpot? Why Choose HubSpot? After just one year, HubSpot customers acquire 129% more leads, close 36% more deals, and see a 37% improvement in ticket closure rates. Learn more about why how HubSpot’s solution is different Case Studies Explore examples of companies like yours from all over the globe that use HubSpot to unite their teams, empower their businesses, and grow better. See all case studies Spotlight: Product Updates Learn about HubSpot’s featured product releases and announcements in this semi-annual product showcase. Explore product updates Pricing Resources Resources Featured Links Spotlight: Product Updates What's New in HubSpot Why Choose HubSpot? Sustainability Community &amp; Events INBOUND Event Webinars HubSpot Community HubSpot User Groups Partners Solutions Partner Program Technology Partner Program Affiliate Partner Program Education Partner Program Startup Partner Program Education The Loop Marketing Playbook What Is Inbound Marketing? HubSpot Blogs Free Courses &amp; Certifications Ebooks, Guides &amp; More HubSpot Knowledge Base Tools Website Templates Developer Tools Services Onboarding Customer Training Migration Strategic Consulting Technical Consulting Hire a Solutions Partner Products Products The HubSpot Customer Platform All of HubSpot's marketing, sales, and customer service software on one agentic platform. Free HubSpot CRM Overview of all products Marketing Hub Marketing automation software Sales Hub Sales software Service Hub Customer service software Content Hub Content marketing software Data Hub Data management software Commerce Hub CPQ, billing, and payments software Smart CRM AI-powered, flexible CRM software Small Business Bundle The Starter edition of each product, built for startups and small businesses Breeze AI agents and features that power the entire platform AEO (Beta) Answer engine optimization tools that track and improve your brand's visibility in AI results HubSpot Marketplace Connect your favorite apps to HubSpot Solutions Solutions By Use Case Marketing Generate leads Automate marketing Sales Build pipeline Close deals Customer Service Scale support Drive retention Content Create content Manage content Startups &amp; Small Businesses Find and reach customers Grow sales and get paid Organize customer data Artificial Intelligence Resolve customer queries 24/7 Automate sales prospecting Research customers faster By Team Size By Team Size For Small Businesses &amp; Startups HubSpot’s all-in-one Starter Customer Platform helps your growing startup or small business find and win customers from day one. Learn more about HubSpot’s Starter Customer Platform For Enterprises With HubSpot’s integrated Enterprise Customer Platform, you don’t have to sacrifice power for ease of use. Learn more about HubSpot’s Enterprise Customer Platform Why HubSpot? Why HubSpot? Why Choose HubSpot? After just one year, HubSpot customers acquire 129% more leads, close 36% more deals, and see a 37% improvement in ticket closure rates. Learn more about why how HubSpot’s solution is different Case Studies Explore examples of companies like yours from all over the globe that use HubSpot to unite their teams, empower their businesses, and grow better. See all case studies Spotlight: Product Updates Learn about HubSpot’s featured product releases and announcements in this semi-annual product showcase. Explore product updates Pricing Resources Resources Featured Links Spotlight: Product Updates What's New in HubSpot Why Choose HubSpot? Sustainability Community &amp; Events INBOUND Event Webinars HubSpot Community HubSpot User Groups Partners Solutions Partner Program Technology Partner Program Affiliate Partner Program Education Partner Program Startup Partner Program Education The Loop Marketing Playbook What Is Inbound Marketing? HubSpot Blogs Free Courses &amp; Certifications Ebooks, Guides &amp; More HubSpot Knowledge Base Tools Website Templates Developer Tools Services Onboarding Customer Training Migration Strategic Consulting Technical Consulting Hire a Solutions Partner About About About Us Careers Contact Us Investor Relations Management Team Get started free Start using HubSpot's document tracking software for free Log in English Select a language 日本語 Deutsch English Español Português Français High Contrast Customer Support Contact Sales Sales Hub Document Tracking Document Tracking Monitor when prospects open, view, and share your sales documents with document tracking software — giving you real-time insights into buyer engagement. Get started free See when a lead opens or forwards a document Use tracking to identify the content types that close deals Keep your team up-to-date with a shared library of documents Click to enlarge Close more deals with trackable documents. Content can be a powerful conversion tool when used right, but you won’t know which content is effective without the right document tracking systems in place.&nbsp; HubSpot’s document tracking features allow you to build a unified library of trackable sales content. Your sales team can then share those documents with prospects from their Gmail, Google Workspace, Outlook, or Office 365 inbox. Get notified when a prospect opens or shares a doc, so you can send relevant and timely follow-ups. Get notified when prospects open documents. Knowing whether prospects are engaging with your sales efforts can be near impossible, especially when they don’t reply to your emails. Document tracking notifies you when contacts open or share your sales documents. Use that insight to send timely and personal follow-ups, prioritize hot leads, and optimize your sales content. Click to enlarge Create a shared library of sales content. Make it easy for your team to find and share the most up-to-date content with prospects. With document management, you can build a library of sales content for your whole team. Easily choose documents to include in your emails using a dropdown menu in your Gmail or Outlook inbox. Click to enlarge Identify documents that close deals. Get insightful reporting about how sales content is helping prospects move toward conversion. Learn how your team uses different documents and how prospects respond to them. By tracking which content is influencing deals, you can surface the best-performing documents and improve your entire sales process. Click to enlarge Have questions? Give us a call and we'll walk you through it. +1 857-829-5060 Related Resources If you’re interested in document tracking software, these related resources may help. Previous Next How Using a Document Library Can Improve Your Sales Process Explore different types of document libraries and learn how to create one for your sales team. Read the document library blog post How to Upload and Share Documents See how to use the documents tool to build a library of content for your team to share documents with contacts. Read the sales documents article Using Sales Hub's Content Tools In this lesson, learn how to use Sales Hub’s outreach tools to match your sales process. Watch the sales content tools lesson Close Frequently Asked Questions What is document tracking? Document tracking makes it easy for busy teams to find, access, and edit critical documents. It keeps a running history of any action taken on a document and by whom. In addition, your documents are stored and versioned securely in a library where any users given access can easily find them. HubSpot’s document tracking systems also include analytics around what happens after a document has been created and sent. For instance, you’ll know if a prospect has accessed the document, what actions they’ve taken on it, and how long it has been since they last looked. Even better: all of this will automatically be updated in the contact record in HubSpot’s Smart CRM. What makes HubSpot’s document tracking software popular? Popular features of HubSpot document tracking include: A library where your team can find all of your existing, up-to-date docs Real-time analytics make it easy to see who’s interacting with your documents and when Performance tracking to understand which of your documents perform best with your prospects Direct integration with major email providers like Gmail, Outlook, and Office 365 Built-in personalization functionality How much time does it take to implement document tracking? The time it will take to set up document tracking depends on whether you’re already using a document management system and how many documents your sales team already has. If you’ve never used a document tracking system before, the setup will be quite easy — simply set up your team with accounts, and they’ll be ready to go. If you’ve already used a document tracking system in the past or have a large library of documents to migrate, the process will take slightly longer as you’ll need to move all of that content over before your team can use the tool.&nbsp; How much does HubSpot’s document tracking cost? HubSpot’s document tracking is part of Sales Hub, and you can get started with it for free. If you’re looking for more advanced features to help automate and scale your sales operations, HubSpot also offers premium features with Starter, Professional, and Enterprise editions of Sales Hub. Popular Features in Sales Hub Document tracking software is available in Sales Hub . Explore additional Sales Hub features below. Previous Next Free Meeting Scheduler Add a meeting scheduler link to your website and emails to book more appointments. Free Email Tracking Software Get notified when leads open your emails so you can close more deals with timely follow-ups. Sales Automation Tools Automate lead rotation, follow-ups, and more with workflows and sequences that drive efficiency. Contact Management Software Keep your CRM records up to date with ease. Add contacts and log activity with a single click. Forecasting Software Inspect deals to make sure your team is on track with a holistic view of your pipeline. Free Email Template Builder Scale your sales efforts by leveraging and creating conversion-ready email templates. Document Tracking Build a library of sales content for your team to share, and track which documents close deals. Call Tracking Software Track, prioritize, and make calls directly from your browser to maximize efficiency. Lead Management &amp; Prospecting Software Track and get notified when a lead visits your website, then follow up flawlessly. Predictive Lead Scoring Software Prioritize the accounts and leads that are most likely to close with automated lead scoring. Free Pipeline Management Software Visualize your entire sales cycle in an easy-to-follow pipeline to prioritize leads and close more deals. Custom Objects Add custom fields to your HubSpot Smart CRM to automate workflows and dive deeper into your data. Payment Links Transform your customers' buying experience with natively built, CRM-powered payments. Quote Software Create and send sales quotes, collect electronic signatures, and receive payments from the same place you manage your deals. AI Email Writer Write emails in a fraction of the time using HubSpot's AI email writer. AI Paragraph Rewriter Easily generate, edit, and repurpose copy with an AI paragraph rewriter. Sales Reporting &amp; Performance Management Software Leverage sales reports to track activity, forecast deals, and gain insight into your funnel. CRM Customization Easily map your specific data model to your HubSpot Smart CRM. Sales Playbook Software Help your team close more deals with competitive battlecards, conversion-ready scripts, and more. Free Chatbot Builder Qualify leads, book meetings, provide customer support, and scale one-to-one conversations with chatbots. Conversation Intelligence Provide better coaching for your team using insights from customer calls directly from your HubSpot CRM. VoIP Software Make calls from inside HubSpot and enjoy automated call recording and logging. ABM Software Unite your marketing and sales teams with collaborative tools for account-based buying. Free Business Card Scanner App Turn business cards into CRM contacts in seconds, and leave manual data entry in the past. HubSpot Mobile App Continue growing your business on the go with the free HubSpot mobile app. Breeze Prospecting Agent Build a qualified sales pipeline with an AI-powered prospecting agent that researches and delivers personalized outreach strategies. AI Guided Selling Software Leverage the power of AI to give sales teams the tools and guidance to create more pipeline and win more deals. Back Close Popular Features All Products and Features"> All Products and Features All Products and Features HubSpot AEO"> HubSpot AEO HubSpot AEO Free Meeting Scheduler App"> Free Meeting Scheduler App Free Meeting Scheduler App Breeze AI Tools"> Breeze AI Tools Breeze AI Tools Email Tracking Software"> Email Tracking Software Email Tracking Software AI Content Writer"> AI Content Writer AI Content Writer AI Website Generator"> AI Website Generator AI Website Generator Email Marketing Software"> Email Marketing Software Email Marketing Software Lead Management Software"> Lead Management Software Lead Management Software AI Prospecting Agent"> AI Prospecting Agent AI Prospecting Agent Free Website Builder"> Free Website Builder Free Website Builder Landing Pages"> Landing Pages Landing Pages Free Online Form Builder"> Free Online Form Builder Free Online Form Builder Free Chatbot Builder"> Free Chatbot Builder Free Chatbot Builder Free Live Chat Software"> Free Live Chat Software Free Live Chat Software Marketing Analytics"> Marketing Analytics Marketing Analytics Free Landing Page Builder"> Free Landing Page Builder Free Landing Page Builder Free Web Hosting"> Free Web Hosting Free Web Hosting Free Tools See All Free Business Tools"> See All Free Business Tools See All Free Business Tools AEO Grader"> AEO Grader AEO Grader Make My Persona"> Make My Persona Make My Persona Email Signature Generator"> Email Signature Generator Email Signature Generator Free Business Templates"> Free Business Templates Free Business Templates Software Comparisons Library"> Software Comparisons Library Software Comparisons Library Website Templates"> Website Templates Website Templates Company About Us"> About Us About Us Careers"> Careers Careers Management Team"> Management Team Management Team Board of Directors"> Board of Directors Board of Directors Investor Relations"> Investor Relations Investor Relations Blog"> Blog Blog Sustainability"> Sustainability Sustainability Contact Us"> Contact Us Contact Us Customers Customer Support"> Customer Support Customer Support Join a Local User Group"> Join a Local User Group Join a Local User Group Partners All Partner Programs"> All Partner Programs All Partner Programs Solutions Partner Program"> Solutions Partner Program Solutions Partner Program Technology Partner Program"> Technology Partner Program Technology Partner Program HubSpot for Startups"> HubSpot for Startups HubSpot for Startups Affiliate Program"> Affiliate Program Affiliate Program Facebook Instagram Youtube Twitter Linkedin Reddit Tiktok Copyright © 2026 HubSpot, Inc. Legal Center Privacy Policy Security Website Accessibility