Marketing and sales | U.S. Small Business Administration Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Menu Primary Navigation Business Guide Explore our business guide 10 steps to start your business Plan your business Market research and competitive analysis Write your business plan Calculate your startup costs Establish business credit Fund your business Buy an existing business or franchise Launch your business Pick your business location Choose a business structure Choose your business name Register your business Get federal and state tax ID numbers Apply for licenses and permits Open a business bank account Get business insurance Manage your business Manage your finances Hire and manage employees Pay taxes Stay legally compliant Buy assets and equipment Marketing and sales AI for small business Strengthen your cybersecurity Prepare for emergencies Recover from disasters Close or sell your business Hire employees with disabilities Grow your business Get more funding Expand to new locations Merge and acquire businesses Become a federal contractor Export products Women-owned businesses Native American-owned businesses Veteran-owned businesses Military spouse businesses Rural businesses Minority-owned businesses Funding Programs Find funding programs Loans Make a payment to SBA 7(a) loans 504 loans Microloans Lender Match COVID-19 relief options Investment capital SBIC directory Disaster assistance Options to bypass permitting delays Alaska floods Texas floods California wildfires Hurricane Helene Physical damage loans Mitigation assistance Economic Injury Disaster Loans Military reservist loan Surety bonds Surety bond agency directory Grants Manufacturing grants State Trade Expansion Program (STEP) Grants for community organizations Federal Contracting Learn about federal contracting Contracting guide Assess your business Basic requirements How to win contracts Types of contracts Size standards Governing rules and responsibilities Prime and subcontracting Contracting assistance programs Women-Owned Small Business Federal Contract program Veteran contracting assistance programs 8(a) Business Development program SBA Mentor-Protégé program Joint ventures HUBZone program Natural Resource Sales Assistance program Counseling and help Contracting area directors Procurement Center Representative directory Commercial Market Representatives Contracting data Small business procurement scorecard Procurement data hub Learning Platform Explore our learning platform SBA Learning Boots to Business Empower to Grow Local Assistance Find resources in your area Resource Partners Small Business Development Centers (SBDC) SCORE Business Mentoring Veterans Business Outreach Centers (VBOC) Women&#039;s Business Centers Export and trade assistance Finance Managers U.S. Export Assistance Centers Federal contracting assistance Regional Innovation Clusters Veterans Business Development Officers Priorities Discover SBA&#039;s priorities Putting American manufacturers first Cutting red tape for small manufacturers Increasing access to capital Make Onshoring Great Again portal Taking your manufacturing business global Manufacturing success stories Small business resource hubs Child care business development support Interagency capital resources for small businesses SBA initiatives Freedom 250 Community Builders Network Small Businesses Against Trafficking in Persons (SBATiP) Councils and committees National Small Business Development Center Advisory Board Invention, Innovation, and Entrepreneurship Advisory Committee Investment Capital Advisory Committee Small Business Lending Advisory Council Regional Regulatory Fairness Boards About SBA Learn about SBA SBA locations Headquarters Offices Disaster Offices District Offices Loan and Guaranty Centers Open government FOIA Digital SBA About the SBA.gov website SBA privacy program Privacy Act request guide Information quality SBA guidance AI inventory Made in America waivers SMS terms and conditions SBA Newsroom Work for SBA Employee life Jobs at SBA Contracting for SBA Disaster response jobs at SBA Organization SBA leadership Contact SBA Forms and documents Observances Performance Federal advisory committees Oversight and advocacy Office of Hearings and Appeals Office of Inspector General Office of the National Ombudsman Office of Advocacy For Partners Newsroom Contact us Search Breadcrumb Home Business Guide Manage your business Marketing and sales Section navigation 10 steps to start your business Plan your business Launch your business Manage your business Manage your finances Hire and manage employees Pay taxes Stay legally compliant Buy assets and equipment Marketing and sales AI for small business Strengthen your cybersecurity Prepare for emergencies Recover from disasters Close or sell your business Hire employees with disabilities Grow your business Marketing and sales Make a marketing plan to persuade consumers to buy your products or services, then decide how you’ll accept payment when it’s time to make a sale. Content Make a marketing plan Marketing takes time, money, and preparation. One of the best ways to stay on schedule and on budget is to make a marketing plan. It describes the actions you’ll take to persuade potential customers to buy your products or services. Your&nbsp; business plan &nbsp;should contain the central elements of your marketing strategy. Your marketing plan turns your strategy into action. Use these sections in your marketing plan Most marketing plans cover these topics. As always, use what works best for your business. Target market Describe your audience in detail. Look at the market’s size, demographics, unique traits, and trends that relate to demand for your business. Competitive advantage Describe what gives your product or service an advantage over the competition. It might be a better product, a lower price, or an excellent customer experience. Sometimes, an environmentally friendly certification or “made in the USA” on your label can be an important factor for customers. Sales plan Describe how you’ll literally sell your service or product to your customers. List the sales methods you’ll use, like retail, wholesale, or your own online store. Explain each step your customer takes once they decide to buy. Marketing and sales goals Describe your marketing and sales goals for the next year. Common marketing and sales goals are to increase email subscribers, grow market share, or increase sales by a certain percent. Marketing action plan Describe how you’ll achieve your marketing and sales goals. List marketing channels you’ll use, like online advertising, radio ads, or billboards. Explain your pricing strategy and how you’ll use promotions. Talk about the customer support that happens after the sale. The federal government regulates advertising and labeling for a number of consumer products, so make sure your advertising is&nbsp; legally compliant. Budget Include a complete breakdown of the costs of your marketing plan. Try to be as accurate as possible. You’ll want to keep tracking your costs once you put your plan into action. Target market Competitive advantage Sales plan Marketing and sales goals Marketing action plan Budget Measure and update your plan Plan to compare your marketing and sales costs to the revenue it generates. You want to make sure you’re getting a positive return on investment, or ROI. Some tactics are hard to measure &nbsp;— like print advertising or word-of-mouth campaigns. Get creative and use others’ advice, but be consistent in how you measure the effectiveness of your marketing efforts. Marketing plans should be maintained on an annual basis, at minimum. Measuring ROI will help you know which part of the plan is working and which part needs to be updated. Don’t forget about operations Not everyone agrees on the exact distinctions between marketing and sales, but most people recognize they’re connected. The influence operations has on marketing and sales is often overlooked. Simple operations elements like your staff uniform, where your product is made, or the product return process contribute to your customer’s experience. That experience shapes how your customers view your company, and can influence whether they’ll become a loyal customer for life or tell their friends to stay away. Spread the word John and Kelly developed a marketing plan to persuade potential customers to visit their auto repair shop. John and Kelly want to attract customers to their auto repair shop. They draw up a marketing plan that describes their strategy and goals. John and Kelly identify their target market as anyone with an automobile. They decide to set their business apart from other local auto shops by stressing its superior service and affordability. It’s important to set clear goals for your marketing plan, like increasing sales by a certain percent. John and Kelly’s auto shop is just getting started, so they want to build a solid customer base. They aim to serve at least a certain number of new customers each month. John and Kelly purchase advertising space on the websites of two local TV news stations, as well as the local newspaper’s website. They also purchase ad time on a local radio station. The advertising costs have been accounted for in the marketing plan. Additionally, they set a date to review their marketing plan. At that time, they’ll compare marketing costs to the revenue it generated to determine if they got a positive return on investment (ROI). John and Kelly have a marketing plan that they believe will attract new customers and help grow their business. Choose how you’ll accept payments The kinds of payments you accept can impact your marketing and sales, as well as your bottom line. Accept forms of payments that are cost effective, secure, and provide a positive experience for your customers. You’ll need a&nbsp; business bank account &nbsp;no matter what kinds of payment you choose. Credit cards To accept credit and debit cards, you’ll need either a merchant services account with a bank or an account with an independent payment processing company. You’ll pay small processing fees for each credit or debit card transaction, plus costs for setting up any necessary equipment. Accepting credit and debit cards exposes you to the risk of fraud, but most vendors provide a certain level of protection for your business. Make sure that you use an EMV (Europay, MasterCard, and Visa) chip reader, which will limit both fraud and your liability. Checks You only need a business bank account to accept checks. You’ll want to create a policy for accepting checks to help you avoid bad or fraudulent checks. Standard practices include only taking checks from well-known or in-state banks, or requiring checks be only for the exact amount owed. You could also use a third party service to help verify the quality of the check. If a check bounces, your options to get the final payment will vary depending on your location. Some states require businesses to mail a registered letter and allow a designated waiting period to lapse before further action is taken. To get payment for a bounced check, you could end up in small claims court or using a collection agency. Cash Many small businesses operate as "cash only" merchants because it’s fast, easy, and inexpensive. If you accept cash, remember that large sums of cash can add to accounting time and come with an additional security risk. You’ll want a secure way to hold your cash, like a register and a safe. There are special reporting requirements for cash. The&nbsp; IRS requires you &nbsp;to report if your business gets more than $10,000 in cash, or a cash equivalent, from one buyer as a result of a single transaction or two or more related transactions. Online payments If you sell your product or service online, you could accept payment through your website with an online payment service. Online payment services typically accept credit and debit cards in addition to other popular online money transfer services. You’ll pay fees to in order to accept payments online, just like accepting credit cards in a physical location. Online payment services require a virtual shopping cart to calculate the total, tax, and shipping costs of an order, in addition to collecting customer account and shipping information. Some online payment service providers offer free shopping cart services to businesses. Example marketing plan See what goes into a successful marketing plan. Download our example marketing plan and learn what to consider when it comes to promoting your business. Get example marketing plan Need help? Get free business counseling Find counselors Last updated May 29, 2025 Return to top Footer navigation About SBA Contact SBA Locations Upcoming events Newsroom SBA blog Leadership team About the site Site map Privacy policy Linking policy Plain language Accessibility Disclaimers Open government Freedom of Information Act No Fear Act Open data sources Policies and guidance Budget and performance Regulations.gov Oversight Inspector General Advocacy Hearings and appeals Ombudsman Fraud and identity theft WhiteHouse.gov USA.gov Sign up Receive information about upcoming SBA events, news alerts, and program updates. * indicates a required field Email ZIP Code Your information will only be used in accordance with our website privacy policy . U.S. Small Business Administration 409 3rd St., SW Washington, DC 20416 800-827-5722