AI Sales Software for Pipeline &amp; Closed Deals | HubSpot Logo - Full (Color) Skip to content English Select a language 日本語 Deutsch English Español Português Français High Contrast Customer Support Contact Sales Close Search Log in About About About Us Careers Contact Us Investor Relations Management Team Back Menu Close Search Products Products The HubSpot Customer Platform All of HubSpot's marketing, sales, and customer service software on one agentic platform. Free HubSpot CRM Overview of all products Marketing Hub Marketing automation software Free and premium plans Sales Hub Sales software Free and premium plans Service Hub Customer service software Free and premium plans Content Hub Content marketing software Free and premium plans Data Hub Data management software Free and premium plans Commerce Hub CPQ, billing, and payments software Free and premium plans Smart CRM AI-powered, flexible CRM software Learn more Small Business Bundle The Starter edition of each product, built for startups and small businesses Learn more Breeze AI agents and features that power the entire platform Learn more AEO (Beta) Answer engine optimization tools that track and improve your brand's visibility in AI results Learn more HubSpot Marketplace Connect your favorite apps to HubSpot See all integrations Solutions Solutions By Use Case By Team Size Why HubSpot? Marketing Generate leads Convert visitors into contacts for your database. Automate marketing Create campaigns with automation and AI. Sales Build pipeline Generate a pipeline of high-quality prospects. Close deals Streamline your process and close more deals faster. Customer Service Scale support Support customers at scale with AI and a help desk. Drive retention Identify opportunities to improve customer health. Content Create content Easily craft content for your audience, with help from AI. Manage content Organize, update, and distribute content in one place. Startups &amp; Small Businesses Find and reach customers Generate leads through content, AI, and automation. Grow sales and get paid Prospect smarter and automate payments. Organize customer data Unify your team and data on one platform. Artificial Intelligence Resolve customer queries 24/7 Scale customer service with an AI customer agent. Automate sales prospecting Identify and engage high-value leads with an AI prospecting agent. Research customers faster Get instant answers about your customers with an AI data agent. By Team Size For Small Businesses &amp; Startups HubSpot’s all-in-one Starter Customer Platform helps your growing startup or small business find and win customers from day one. Learn more about HubSpot’s Starter Customer Platform For Enterprises With HubSpot’s integrated Enterprise Customer Platform, you don’t have to sacrifice power for ease of use. Learn more about HubSpot’s Enterprise Customer Platform Why HubSpot? Why Choose HubSpot? After just one year, HubSpot customers acquire 129% more leads, close 36% more deals, and see a 37% improvement in ticket closure rates. Learn more about why how HubSpot’s solution is different Case Studies Explore examples of companies like yours from all over the globe that use HubSpot to unite their teams, empower their businesses, and grow better. See all case studies Spotlight: Product Updates Learn about HubSpot’s featured product releases and announcements in this semi-annual product showcase. Explore product updates Pricing Resources Resources Featured Links Spotlight: Product Updates What's New in HubSpot Why Choose HubSpot? Sustainability Community &amp; Events INBOUND Event Webinars HubSpot Community HubSpot User Groups Partners Solutions Partner Program Technology Partner Program Affiliate Partner Program Education Partner Program Startup Partner Program Education The Loop Marketing Playbook What Is Inbound Marketing? HubSpot Blogs Free Courses &amp; Certifications Ebooks, Guides &amp; More HubSpot Knowledge Base Tools Website Templates Developer Tools Services Onboarding Customer Training Migration Strategic Consulting Technical Consulting Hire a Solutions Partner Products Products The HubSpot Customer Platform All of HubSpot's marketing, sales, and customer service software on one agentic platform. Free HubSpot CRM Overview of all products Marketing Hub Marketing automation software Sales Hub Sales software Service Hub Customer service software Content Hub Content marketing software Data Hub Data management software Commerce Hub CPQ, billing, and payments software Smart CRM AI-powered, flexible CRM software Small Business Bundle The Starter edition of each product, built for startups and small businesses Breeze AI agents and features that power the entire platform AEO (Beta) Answer engine optimization tools that track and improve your brand's visibility in AI results HubSpot Marketplace Connect your favorite apps to HubSpot Solutions Solutions By Use Case Marketing Generate leads Automate marketing Sales Build pipeline Close deals Customer Service Scale support Drive retention Content Create content Manage content Startups &amp; Small Businesses Find and reach customers Grow sales and get paid Organize customer data Artificial Intelligence Resolve customer queries 24/7 Automate sales prospecting Research customers faster By Team Size By Team Size For Small Businesses &amp; Startups HubSpot’s all-in-one Starter Customer Platform helps your growing startup or small business find and win customers from day one. Learn more about HubSpot’s Starter Customer Platform For Enterprises With HubSpot’s integrated Enterprise Customer Platform, you don’t have to sacrifice power for ease of use. Learn more about HubSpot’s Enterprise Customer Platform Why HubSpot? Why HubSpot? Why Choose HubSpot? After just one year, HubSpot customers acquire 129% more leads, close 36% more deals, and see a 37% improvement in ticket closure rates. Learn more about why how HubSpot’s solution is different Case Studies Explore examples of companies like yours from all over the globe that use HubSpot to unite their teams, empower their businesses, and grow better. See all case studies Spotlight: Product Updates Learn about HubSpot’s featured product releases and announcements in this semi-annual product showcase. Explore product updates Pricing Resources Resources Featured Links Spotlight: Product Updates What's New in HubSpot Why Choose HubSpot? Sustainability Community &amp; Events INBOUND Event Webinars HubSpot Community HubSpot User Groups Partners Solutions Partner Program Technology Partner Program Affiliate Partner Program Education Partner Program Startup Partner Program Education The Loop Marketing Playbook What Is Inbound Marketing? HubSpot Blogs Free Courses &amp; Certifications Ebooks, Guides &amp; More HubSpot Knowledge Base Tools Website Templates Developer Tools Services Onboarding Customer Training Migration Strategic Consulting Technical Consulting Hire a Solutions Partner About About About Us Careers Contact Us Investor Relations Management Team Get a demo of HubSpot's sales software Start 14-day free trial of HubSpot's sales tools Log in English Select a language 日本語 Deutsch English Español Português Français High Contrast Customer Support Contact Sales Send quotes and close deals even faster. Sales Hub and Commerce Hub pair perfectly together. Discover Commerce Hub quotes and payments software Home Sales Hub Sales Hub® Sales Software AI-powered tools to build pipelines and close deals. Get a demo of HubSpot's sales software Start 14-day free trial of HubSpot's sales tools Business Solutions Transform Every Rep Into a Top Performer with AI AI that knows when to reach out, what to say, and how to engage – turning conversations into closed deals without adding headcount. Prospect Smarter Know when to reach out and who to target. Sales Hub's AI-powered tools focus your team on high-potential accounts showing real intent, not generic lead lists. Lead Management Manage leads and activities on one AI-powered workspace and turn more leads into deals. Breeze Prospecting Agent (Beta) Find accounts, source buying committees, and execute personalized outreach with an AI agent in one workflow. Sales Automation Set up automated multi-channel outreach that adapts based on prospect engagement. Breeze Customer Agent Convert sales opportunities faster with an AI agent that helps resolve inquiries, qualify prospects, and book meetings with 24/7 support. Call Tracking Make calls efficiently with a power dialer, voicemail drops, and CRM logging for your most important conversations.&nbsp; Email Templates Turn your best sales emails into templates you can personalize, optimize, and share. View more Commerce Hub + Sales Hub Win the deal. Quote fast. Get paid. Don't let separate sales and CPQ tools slow you down. Close deals in Sales Hub, then quote, bill, and collect payment in Commerce Hub — all without switching platforms. Explore Commerce Hub quotes and payments software Accelerate Revenue Growth Grow revenue faster with intelligent sales software that analyzes customer behavior and prioritizes high-potential leads. Seamlessly integrated with Commerce Hub for AI-powered quote creation, this powerful combination enables reps to close deals even faster. Meeting Scheduler Use AI to automatically prep for, follow up on, and capture every meeting detail. Deal Pipelines Easily add and score deals, assign tasks, and track your most lucrative prospects. AI Guided Selling Guide sellers in a workspace that surfaces leads, deals, tasks, and target accounts with smart queues and daily action summaries. CPQ Software AI-powered CPQ — configure, price, quote — accelerates the quoting process from one unified platform. Document Tracking Build a library of sales content for your team to share and tracking which documents close deals.&nbsp; Smart Deal Progression (Beta) AI analyzes conversation transcripts and deal history to suggest CRM updates, draft follow-up emails, and next steps to keep deals moving forward. View more Power Relevant Connections Unite your sales data, tools, and teams on a single customer platform. Sales leaders can track performance, predict revenue, and analyze feedback in one place. Sales Analytics &amp; Reporting Get full visibility into your process to measure performance and deliver results. Conversation Intelligence Bring the voice of the customer into your CRM and provide better coaching. Forecasting Get a comprehensive view of your pipeline with AI-powered projections. Customer Proof Explore case studies Real Growth, Real Stories See how sales teams are using Sales Hub to convert opportunities faster with AI. See why companies like to work with Sales Hub. Download the ROI report 73% of sales professionals&nbsp;say HubSpot increased their win rate 94% more deals closed after 6 months 48% decrease in average time to close with AI sales features Grow Without Limits: Sales Hub Pricing Sales software that scales with you. Free No credit card required $0/month Track deals Engage visitors with live chat Schedule meetings without the back-and-forth Starter Starts at $15 $20 /month per seat* Automate personalized outreach Collect payments instantly Personalize content Professional Starts at $100/month per seat Find and engage high-value prospects Predict revenue with AI-powered forecasting Create automated follow-ups Enterprise Starts at $150/month per seat Create custom objects for unique processes Score leads with AI Coach reps with conversation intelligence Demo premium editions of HubSpot's sales software Start 14-day free trial of HubSpot's sales tools *Discount available for new customers only. Offer has no set end date and can be discontinued at any time. For more detailed information on product packaging and the limits that apply, please see our pricing page . Price shown in USD and subject to applicable tax. Frequently Asked Questions What is sales software? Sales software includes all the tools you need to improve your sales team’s productivity. It supports the entire sales cycle, from finding potential leads and tracking their progress, to managing and automating the deal flow, and even generating quotes. Additionally, it offers valuable analytics, coaching, and reporting features for managers to onboard and coach reps, analyze strategy, and optimize process.&nbsp; Rather than using multiple tools to accomplish each of these tasks separately, HubSpot’s sales software enables teams to do all their work under one roof. Save time and energy by using a single tool, rather than splitting up your team’s energy and information across multiple tools or platforms. Do Sales Hub and Commerce Hub work together? Yes — and it's one of the most powerful combinations in HubSpot. Sales Hub customers get access to HubSpot's Commerce Hub, which includes a fully integrated, AI-powered CPQ solution that lets sales teams quickly generate, customize, send, and track quotes. It pulls context from the deal record to update cover letters, business case summaries, and line items for faster, more accurate quoting. Because both hubs are built into HubSpot's Smart CRM, the experience is fast, seamless, and easy to use. Reps can generate quotes with one click, apply branded templates, automate approvals, and see real-time buyer engagement — all without leaving their sales workflow. This means your team can move from prospecting to payment in one place, eliminating handoffs and reducing time to close. HubSpot customers can access Commerce Hub's CPQ capabilities by purchasing a Commerce Hub seat. Do I have to use HubSpot as a CRM in order to get value from Sales Hub? What if I already have a CRM? Sales Hub is HubSpot’s sales software solution. It works great when paired with HubSpot’s Smart CRM, but can be used to drive productivity and power customer connections alongside your existing CRM, too. For example, your business development team might adopt Sales Hub as a sales engagement platform, to consolidate prospecting activities and manage leads in one place. Whether you previously ran your business out of Excel, or were leveraging a legacy CRM to store your data, HubSpot’s import tools make it easy to move your data quickly, while giving you the confidence that your data will be accurate and actionable by your team. How much does HubSpot’s sales software cost? HubSpot’s sales software is called Sales Hub. Many of Sales Hub’s tools are available for free, with more advanced features designed to help automate and scale your sales operations available in Starter, Professional, and Enterprise editions . Curious about the return on investment from Sales Hub? Explore our ROI calculator. Can I implement HubSpot’s software without dedicated programmers/developers? Yes. Our customer success team is committed to getting you up and running in days or weeks (not months) so you can start selling better sooner. Looking for more customization and expertise? Our solutions partners offer a wide range of specialized support to help you get the most out of your HubSpot implementation. How is Sales Hub different from other sales solutions, like Salesforce? Unlike a lot of software that’s been built by acquisition, Sales Hub was built from the ground up. It’s both deeply powerful and uniquely easy to use. The result? Your team gets up and running faster, allowing you to achieve ROI more quickly. Learn more about the differences between HubSpot and Salesforce . What are popular sales software features? Popular features in HubSpot’s sales software include: Contact and lead management organize prospecting activities and propel pipeline growth. Email tracking and automation let you track engagement in real-time, automate personalized email sequences, and schedule emails for optimal timing. Deal and pipeline management let you visualize and manage deals from start to finish, assign tasks, set reminders, and collaborate with team members. Sales analytics and reporting let you gain valuable insights into sales performance with dashboards, activity tracking, revenue tracking, and forecasting. Document management lets you store and manage sales documents efficiently, allowing easy access and sharing with prospects and team members. Sales automation and workflows automate repetitive tasks and let you create custom workflows to improve efficiency in lead segmentation, task assignments, and email sequences. Forecasting software gives you a holistic overview of your entire pipeline so you can quickly dive into the details with your team. How much time does it take to implement sales software? Sales software is up and running from the get-go. Simply grant your sales team access to the appropriate tools, and they can start using them immediately. Features such as email templates, deals, and meetings are ready to go from the moment you log in. For more experienced teams, advanced features like conversation intelligence and predictive lead scoring take your sales organization to the next level. While these features are available right from the start, it may take some time to gather valuable insights from them. What kind of ROI can I expect from Sales Hub? Calculate the ROI you could see with Sales Hub based on your industry, region, and current sales metrics using our ROI calculator . The calculator harnesses data from over 288,000 HubSpot customers globally. Enhance your analysis by coupling this with our TCO calculator to understand your total cost of owning HubSpot and get a more precise view of your potential ROI. Can I customize my Sales Hub account? Of course! With custom objects (available in the enterprise edition of Sales Hub), you have complete flexibility and control to match your data to your business. You’ll have full flexibility to name the object, determine its properties, and decide what other objects it can be associated with. And you can easily sort, automate, and report on data associated with them right in HubSpot. Plus, with more than 2,000 custom integrations in the HubSpot Marketplace , you can easily connect HubSpot to your favorite tools in just a few clicks. Elevate Your Sales Performance Regain productivity and power connection with AI. Get a demo of HubSpot's sales software Start 14-day free trial of HubSpot's sales tools Back Close Popular Features All Products and Features"> All Products and Features All Products and Features HubSpot AEO"> HubSpot AEO HubSpot AEO Free Meeting Scheduler App"> Free Meeting Scheduler App Free Meeting Scheduler App Breeze AI Tools"> Breeze AI Tools Breeze AI Tools Email Tracking Software"> Email Tracking Software Email Tracking Software AI Content Writer"> AI Content Writer AI Content Writer AI Website Generator"> AI Website Generator AI Website Generator Email Marketing Software"> Email Marketing Software Email Marketing Software Lead Management Software"> Lead Management Software Lead Management Software AI Prospecting Agent"> AI Prospecting Agent AI Prospecting Agent Free Website Builder"> Free Website Builder Free Website Builder Landing Pages"> Landing Pages Landing Pages Free Online Form Builder"> Free Online Form Builder Free Online Form Builder Free Chatbot Builder"> Free Chatbot Builder Free Chatbot Builder Free Live Chat Software"> Free Live Chat Software Free Live Chat Software Marketing Analytics"> Marketing Analytics Marketing Analytics Free Landing Page Builder"> Free Landing Page Builder Free Landing Page Builder Free Web Hosting"> Free Web Hosting Free Web Hosting Free Tools See All Free Business Tools"> See All Free Business Tools See All Free Business Tools AEO Grader"> AEO Grader AEO Grader Make My Persona"> Make My Persona Make My Persona Email Signature Generator"> Email Signature Generator Email Signature Generator Free Business Templates"> Free Business Templates Free Business Templates Software Comparisons Library"> Software Comparisons Library Software Comparisons Library Website Templates"> Website Templates Website Templates Company About Us"> About Us About Us Careers"> Careers Careers Management Team"> Management Team Management Team Board of Directors"> Board of Directors Board of Directors Investor Relations"> Investor Relations Investor Relations Blog"> Blog Blog Sustainability"> Sustainability Sustainability Contact Us"> Contact Us Contact Us Customers Customer Support"> Customer Support Customer Support Join a Local User Group"> Join a Local User Group Join a Local User Group Partners All Partner Programs"> All Partner Programs All Partner Programs Solutions Partner Program"> Solutions Partner Program Solutions Partner Program Technology Partner Program"> Technology Partner Program Technology Partner Program HubSpot for Startups"> HubSpot for Startups HubSpot for Startups Affiliate Program"> Affiliate Program Affiliate Program Facebook Instagram Youtube Twitter Linkedin Reddit Tiktok Copyright © 2026 HubSpot, Inc. Legal Center Privacy Policy Security Website Accessibility