Your First Render Deploy – Render Docs Docs Changelog Search Ask AI Sign In Get Started Navigate Start Home Your first deploy Free instances Platform features by plan Use with coding agents New FAQ Templates Migrate from… Heroku Railway Service Types Which to use? Static sites Web services Private services Background workers Cron jobs Workflows Beta Multi-service architectures Deploys How deploys work Supported languages Build pipeline Deploy hooks Troubleshooting deploys Previewing changes Single-service previews Preview environments (multi-service) Docker deploys Overview Deploy a registered image Using secrets Git providers GitHub GitLab Bitbucket Deploying a specific commit Monorepo support Runtime Native runtimes Environment variables &amp; secrets Default environment variables Workflows Beta Intro to workflows Tutorial Limits &amp; pricing How to… Define tasks Trigger runs Develop locally SDK reference TypeScript SDK Python SDK Example workflows TypeScript examples Python examples Datastores Persistent disks Key Value (Redis®-compatible) Creating &amp; connecting Valkey/Redis FAQ Postgres databases Overview Creating &amp; connecting Recovery &amp; backups Database credentials Read replicas High availability Admin apps Extensions Connection pooling Version upgrades Troubleshooting performance Flexible plans Legacy instance types Networking Regions Private network Private links Edge caching WebSockets Outbound bandwidth TLS certificates Custom domains Overview Cloudflare Namecheap Other DNS providers IP addresses Outbound IPs Inbound IP rules Static sites Custom response headers Redirects &amp; rewrites Operational Controls The Render Dashboard SSH / Shell access Projects &amp; environments Service actions Scaling Rollbacks Maintenance mode One-off jobs Infrastructure as code Blueprints overview render.yaml reference Terraform provider Observability Health checks Uptime best practices Notifications Webhooks Email / Slack Metrics In-dashboard metrics OpenTelemetry streaming Logging In-dashboard logs Syslog streaming Integrations MCP Server Render CLI Overview Command reference REST API Overview API reference Third-party tools Datadog QuotaGuard Static IP Formspree User Management Workspaces, members, &amp; roles New workspace plans Login settings Audit logs Organizations Overview SAML SSO Platform Protections DDoS protection Platform maintenance Compliance Overview HIPAA (US health data) HIPAA best practices Shared responsibility model Pentest policy Compare Heroku vs Render Vercel vs Render Your First Render Deploy Run your web app in minutes. Welcome! Let&#x27;s get up and running on Render. This tutorial uses free Render resources. No payment is required. All you need is a GitHub repo with the web app you want to deploy (GitLab and Bitbucket work too). Want to deploy an example app using a particular language or framework? Check out our quickstarts . 1. Sign up Signing up is fast and free: Sign up for Render 2. Choose a service type To deploy to Render, you create a service that pulls, builds, and runs your code. Open the Render Dashboard . In the top-right corner, open the + New dropdown: Here you select a service type . For this tutorial, choose Web Service or Static Site : Service type Description Common frameworks Web Service Choose this if your web app runs any server-side code. The app also needs to listen for HTTP requests on a port. Full-stack web apps, API servers, and mobile backends are all web services. Express, Next.js, Fastify, Django, FastAPI, Flask, Rails, Phoenix Static Site Choose this if your web app consists entirely of static content (mostly HTML/CSS/JS). Blogs, portfolios, and documentation sets are often (but not always ) static sites. Create React App, Vue.js, Hugo, Docusaurus, Next.js static exports You can deploy either of these service types for free on Render. Free web services &quot;spin down&quot; after 15 minutes of inactivity. They spin back up when they next receive an incoming HTTP request or new WebSocket connection. Learn more about free instance limitations. 3. Link your repo After you select a service type, the service creation form appears. First, connect your GitHub/GitLab/Bitbucket account to Render: After you connect, the form shows a list of all the repos you have access to: Select the repo that contains your web app and click Connect . The rest of the creation form appears. 4. Configure deployment Complete the service creation form to define how Render will build and run your app. Click the tab for your service type to view important field details: Web Service Web Service Static Site Static Site Important web service fields Field Description Branch Your service only deploys commits on the Git branch you specify, such as main . Render can automatically redeploy your app whenever you push changes to this branch. Root Directory Deploying from a monorepo? Specify the subdirectory that represents your application root. Your build and start commands will run from this directory. Language If your app&#x27;s programming language isn&#x27;t listed in this dropdown, you can still deploy using the Docker runtime if you build your app from a Dockerfile . Build Command This is the command that Render will use to build your app from source and install dependencies. Common examples include: Node.js Node.js Python Python Ruby Ruby You can also use bun or yarn . You can also use uv or poetry . To use uv , your project must include a uv.lock file. This usually resembles the command you run locally to install dependencies and perform any necessary compilation. Start Command This is the command that Render will use to start your app. Common examples include: Node.js Node.js Python Python Ruby Ruby You can also use bun or yarn . For some frameworks, this might differ from the command you run locally to start your app. For example, a Flask app might use flask run locally but gunicorn for production. Instance Type This determines your service&#x27;s RAM and CPU, along with its cost. Choose the Free instance type to deploy for free: Environment Variables These will be available to your service at both build time and runtime. If you forget any, you can always add them later and redeploy. Important static site fields Field Description Branch Your site only deploys commits on the branch you specify, such as main . Render can automatically redeploy whenever you push changes to this branch. Root Directory Deploying from a monorepo? Specify the subdirectory that represents your application root. Your build command will run from this directory. Build Command This is the command that Render will use to install dependencies and then build your site&#x27;s static assets. Common examples include: Next.js / Create React App / Vue.js Next.js / Create React App / Vue.js Jekyll Jekyll For Next.js, make sure you&#x27;ve set output: &#x27;export&#x27; in your next.config.js file. Publish Directory This is the directory containing your site&#x27;s static assets, which are usually generated by your build command. Common examples include: build (Create React App, Vue.js, etc.) out (Next.js static export) _site (Jekyll) Environment Variables These will be available to your service at build time. Additionally, some static site generators substitute environment variable values into your generated static assets. For example: Create React App performs environment variable substitution for variables prefixed with REACT_APP_ . Next.js does the same for variables prefixed with NEXT_PUBLIC_ . If you forget any, you can always add them later and redeploy. When you&#x27;re done, click the Deploy button at the bottom of the form. Render kicks off your first deploy. 5. Monitor your deploy Render automatically opens a log explorer that shows your deploy&#x27;s progress: Follow along as the deploy proceeds through your build and start commands. If the deploy completes successfully, the deploy&#x27;s status updates to Live and you&#x27;ll see log lines like these: If the deploy fails, the deploy&#x27;s status updates to Failed . Review the log feed to help identify the issue. Also see Troubleshooting Your Deploy for common solutions. After you identify the issue, push a new commit to your linked branch. Render will automatically start a new deploy. 6. Open your app After your app deploys successfully, you&#x27;re ready to view it live. Every Render web service and static site receives a unique onrender.com URL. Find this URL on your service&#x27;s page in the Render Dashboard: Click the URL to open it in your browser. Your service will serve the content for its root path. Congratulations! You&#x27;ve deployed your first app on Render 🎉 When you&#x27;re ready, check out recommended next steps . Next steps Connect a datastore Render provides fully managed Postgres and Key Value instances for your data needs. Both provide a Free instance type to help you get started. Free Render Postgres databases expire 30 days after creation. You can upgrade to a paid instance at any time to keep your data. Learn more about free instance limitations. Learn how to create datastores and connect them to your app: Render Postgres databases Render Key Value instances Paid services can also attach a disk for persistence of local filesystem data (by default, local filesystem changes are lost with each deploy ). Install the Render CLI The Render CLI helps you manage your Render services right from your terminal. Trigger deploys, view logs, initiate psql sessions, and more. Get started with the Render CLI. Add a custom domain Each Render web service and static site receives its own onrender.com URL. You can also add your own custom domains to these service types. Learn how. Learn about operational controls Deploying your app is just the beginning. Check out a few of the ways you can manage and monitor your running services on Render: Scaling your instance count Analyzing service metrics Rolling back a deploy Enabling maintenance mode Note that some of these capabilities require running your service on a paid instance type. Explore other service types In addition to supporting web services and static sites, Render offers a variety of other service types to support any use case: Service type Description Private services Run servers that aren&#x27;t reachable from the public internet. Background Workers Offload long-running and computationally expensive tasks from your web servers. Cron Jobs Run periodic tasks on a schedule you define. Workflows Define collections of composable, long-running tasks that execute across distributed compute. Note that free instances are not available for these service types. Use this flowchart to identify the right service type for your use case: Copy page Your First Render Deploy 1. Sign up 2. Choose a service type 3. Link your repo 4. Configure deployment 5. Monitor your deploy 6. Open your app Next steps Connect a datastore Install the Render CLI Add a custom domain Learn about operational controls Explore other service types Pricing Blog Security Customers Careers © Render 2026 bash Copy to clipboard npm install bash Copy to clipboard pip install -r requirements.txt bash Copy to clipboard bundle install bash Copy to clipboard npm start bash Copy to clipboard gunicorn your_application.wsgi bash Copy to clipboard ./bin/rails server bash Copy to clipboard npm install &amp;&amp; npm run build bash Copy to clipboard bundle install &amp;&amp; bundle exec jekyll build bash Copy to clipboard # Web service == &gt; Deploying .. . == &gt; Running &#x27;npm start&#x27; # (or your start command) == &gt; Your service is live 🎉 # Static site == &gt; Uploading build .. . == &gt; Your site is live 🎉 Yes! No, it'll run in the background. Yes! No, only private network traffic. Yes! No, I'm only serving static assets (HTML, CSS, JS, etc.) Yes! No, I'm running on-demand workloads. Yes! No, I'll use a framework like Celery or Sidekiq. Will your code receive incoming traffic? Will any of that traffic come from the public internet? Does your code perform any server-side logic? Are you running simple tasks on a schedule? Do you want Render to handle job queuing and provisioning? Create a Static site Create a Web service Create a Background worker Create a Cron job Create a Private service Create a Workflow