Day Trading | FINRA.org Skip to main content FINRA Utility Menu About Us Careers BrokerCheck Data Media Center For Firms &nbsp; For the Public FINRA DATA FINRA Data provides non-commercial use of data, specifically the ability to save data views and create and manage a Bond Watchlist. Login For Industry Professionals FINPRO GATEWAY Registered representatives can fulfill Continuing Education requirements, view their industry CRD record and perform other compliance tasks. Login For Member Firms FINRA GATEWAY Firm compliance professionals can access filings and requests, run reports and submit support tickets. Login For Case Participants DR PORTAL Arbitration and mediation case participants and FINRA neutrals can view case information and submit documents through this Dispute Resolution Portal. Login Need Help? | Check System Status Log In to other FINRA systems Rules &amp; Guidance R&amp;G Section 1 FINRA Manual Updates Interpreting the Rules Notices Guidance Frequently Asked Questions Key Topics Interpretive Questions R&amp;G Section 2 The Rulemaking Process Rule Filings Rule Filing Status Report Requests for Comments Regulatory Policy Agenda Rulebook Consolidation R&amp;G Section 3 Adjudications &amp; Decisions National Adjudicatory Council (NAC) Office of Hearing Officers (OHO) R&amp;G Section 4 Enforcement Disciplinary Actions Online Monthly Disciplinary Actions Sanction Guidelines Individuals Barred by FINRA Registration, Exams &amp; CE Registration section 1 Registration Broker Dealers Capital Acquisition Brokers Funding Portals Individuals Registration Section 2 Qualification Exams Securities Industry Essentials Exam (SIE) Series 7 Continuing Education (CE) View a Regulatory Element Learning Plan Registration Section 3 Registration Systems Classic CRD Financial Professional Gateway (FinPro) Financial Industry Networking Directory (FIND) Events &amp; Training Events &amp; Training Section 1 Upcoming Events On-Demand Education FINRA Crypto and Blockchain Education Program FINRA Certified Regulatory and Compliance Professional (CRCP)® Program Financial Learning Experience (FLEX) Technical &amp; Navigational Webinars Filing &amp; Reporting Filing &amp; Reporting Section 1 FINRA Gateway Systems Status Entitlement Program Financial Intelligence Fusion Center (FIFC) Market Transparency Reporting Tools Regulatory Filing Systems Data Transfer Tools E-Bill Compliance Tools Compliance Tools Section 1 Anti-Money Laundering Template Cybersecurity Checklist Compliance Calendar Weekly Update Email Archive Membership Application Program (MAP) Tools For Investors For Investors Section 1 Investor Insights Tools &amp; Calculators Personal Finance Financial Goals Net Worth Spending Debt Credit Scores Emergency Funds For Investors Section 2 Investing Investing Basics Investment Accounts Investment Products Investment Strategies Working With an Investment Professional Protect Your Money Check Registration Avoid Fraud Watch for Red Flags Safeguard Your Identity For Investors Section 3 For the Military Need Help? File a Complaint FINRA Securities Helpline for Seniors Dispute Resolution Services SIPC Protection Avenues for Recovery of Losses FINRA Utility Menu About Us Careers BrokerCheck Data Media Center For Firms &nbsp; For the Public FINRA DATA FINRA Data provides non-commercial use of data, specifically the ability to save data views and create and manage a Bond Watchlist. Login For Industry Professionals FINPRO GATEWAY Registered representatives can fulfill Continuing Education requirements, view their industry CRD record and perform other compliance tasks. Login For Member Firms FINRA GATEWAY Firm compliance professionals can access filings and requests, run reports and submit support tickets. Login For Case Participants DR PORTAL Arbitration and mediation case participants and FINRA neutrals can view case information and submit documents through this Dispute Resolution Portal. Login Need Help? | Check System Status Log In to other FINRA systems Font Awesome fontawesome.com --> For Investors Investing Investment Products Stocks EXPLORE THIS SECTION FINRA Main Navigation Investor Insights Tools &amp; Calculators Personal Finance Investing Investing Basics Investment Accounts Investment Products Investment Strategies Working With an Investment Professional Protect Your Money Check Registration Avoid Fraud Watch for Red Flags Safeguard Your Identity For the Military Need Help? Day Trading Do you actively trade stocks? If so, it's important to know what it means to be a "pattern day trader" (PDT) because there are requirements associated with engaging in pattern day trading. Once you understand the requirements you must meet, you reduce the risk that your firm will place restrictions on your ability to trade. What Is Day Trading? Day trading, as defined by FINRA’s margin rule, refers to a trading strategy where an individual buys and sells (or sells and buys) the same security in a margin account on the same day in an attempt to profit from small movements in the price of the security. FINRA’s margin rule for day trading applies to day trading in any security, including options . Day trading in a cash account is not permitted.&nbsp;All securities purchased in the cash account must be paid for in full before they are sold. In the cash account, under FINRA rules, purchasing a security, paying for it in full as required by Regulation T, and then selling the same security is not considered a day trade. Who Is a Pattern Day Trader? According to FINRA rules , you’re considered a pattern day trader if you execute four or more "day trades" within five business days —provided that the number of day trades represents more than 6 percent of your total trades in the margin account for that same five business day period. There are two methods of counting day trades. Please contact your brokerage firm for more details on how they count trades to determine if you’re a pattern day trader. The rules also require your firm to designate you as a pattern day trader if it knows or has a reasonable basis to believe that you’ll engage in pattern day trading. For example, if the firm provided day-trading training to you before opening your account, it could designate you as a pattern day trader. In general, once your account has been coded as a pattern day trader account, a firm will continue to regard you as a pattern day trader, even if you don’t day trade for a five-day period, because the firm will have a “reasonable belief” that you’re a pattern day trader based on your prior trading activities. If you change your trading strategy to cease your day trading activities, you can contact your firm to discuss the appropriate coding of your account. What Are the Requirements for Pattern Day Traders? First, pattern day traders must maintain minimum equity of $25,000 in their margin account on any day that the customer day trades. This required minimum equity, which can be a combination of cash and eligible securities, must be in your account prior to engaging in any day-trading activities. If the account falls below the $25,000 requirement, the pattern day trader won’t be permitted to day trade until the account is restored to the $25,000 minimum equity level. In addition, pattern day traders cannot trade in excess of their "day-trading buying power," which is generally up to four times the maintenance margin excess as of the close of business of the prior day. Maintenance margin excess is the amount by which the equity in the margin account exceeds the required margin. What if I Get a Margin Call? If a pattern day trader exceeds the day-trading buying power limitation, a firm will issue a day-trading margin call, after which the pattern day trader will then have, at most, five business days to deposit funds to meet the call. Until the margin call is met, the account will be restricted to a day-trading buying power of only two times maintenance margin excess based on the customer's daily total trading commitment. If the day-trading margin call is not met by the deadline, the account will be further restricted to trading only on a cash available basis for 90 days or until the call is met. Any funds used to meet the day-trading minimum equity requirement or to meet a day-trading margin call must remain in the account for two business days following the close of business on any day when the deposit is required. The use of cross-guarantees to meet any day-trading margin requirements is prohibited. Why Do I Have to Maintain Minimum Equity of $25,000? Day trading can be extremely risky—both for the day trader and for the brokerage firm that clears the day trader’s transactions. Even if you end the day with no open positions, the trades you made while day trading most likely have not yet settled. The day trading margin requirements provide firms with a cushion to meet any deficiencies in your account resulting from day trading. Most margin requirements are calculated based on a customer's securities positions at the end of the trading day. A customer who only day trades doesn’t have a security position at the end of the day upon which a margin calculation would otherwise result in a margin call. Nevertheless, the same customer has generated financial risk throughout the day. These rules address this risk by imposing a margin requirement for day trading calculated based on a trader’s positions during the day rather than on open positions at the end of the day. Firms are free to impose a higher equity requirement than the minimum specified in the rules, and many of them do. These higher minimum requirements are often referred to as "house" requirements. Is Pattern Day Trading Right for You? Before you come to any conclusion, read and consider the points set forth in the Day-Trading Risk Disclosure Statement embodied in FINRA Rule 2270. In addition to minimum equity requirements, day trading requires knowledge of both securities markets in general and, more specifically, your brokerage firm's business practices, including the operation of the firm's order execution systems and procedures. Day trading generally isn’t appropriate for someone of limited resources, limited investment or trading experience and low risk tolerance . A day trader should be prepared to lose all of the funds used for day trading. Given the risks , day-trading activities shouldn’t be funded with retirement savings, student loans, second mortgages, emergency funds, assets set aside for purposes such as education or home ownership or funds required to meet living expenses. Back to Top TOOLS &amp; CALCULATORS Smart Investing Courses Market Data Center Fixed Income Data BrokerCheck Fund Analyzer View All Recent Investor Insights Investing Understanding the New Intraday Margin Requirements Avoid Fraud Customer Account Takeovers: What They Are and How to Protect Yourself Futures and Commodities 4 Tips to Know Before Buying Physical Precious Metals View All FINRA Utility Menu About Us Careers BrokerCheck Data Media Center For Firms FINRA Main Navigation Rules &amp; Guidance Registration, Exams &amp; CE Events &amp; Training Filing &amp; Reporting Compliance Tools For Investors General Inquiries 301-590-6500 Securities Helpline for Seniors ® 844-574-3577 (Mon-Fri 9am-5pm ET) File a Regulatory Tip To report on abuse or fraud in the industry Arbitration &amp; Mediation FINRA operates the largest securities dispute resolution forum in the United States File an Investor Complaint File a complaint about fraud or unfair practices. Small Firm Help Line 833-26-FINRA (Mon-Fri 9am-6pm ET) Office of the Ombuds Report a concern about FINRA at 888-700-0028 Footer Legal Links Site Map Privacy Policy Terms of Use Translate Contact Us © 2026 FINRA. All Rights Reserved. FINRA is a Registered Trademark of the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, Inc.